Assessing Economic Conditions and Risks to Financial Stability By Eric S. Rosengren September 20, 2019 New York, NY Credit Market Conference New York University Stern School of Business Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Takeaway: The central bank’s monetary policy stance is already accommodative, whether the Fed Funds rate is judged relative to inflation or relative to its long-run neutral level. Excerpt: “Yet, it is notable that the federal funds futures market is pricing in a significant probability of another decrease by year end. The market apparently believes the economy needs added stimulus to continue the expansion. My own view is different.” Takeaway: The economic data suggest continued expansion. The national unemployment rate is currently at 3.7 percent – very low by historical standards. And inflation is moving toward the Fed’s 2 percent target. Excerpt: “Current economic conditions are quite favorable, and stable, and private forecasters expect those conditions to remain quite similar through the end of the year. […] The data we have in hand suggest instead that the recovery would continue apace even with little monetary policy accommodation. […] In my view, with inflation near target, this level of accommodation is not needed.” Takeaway: Risks to the economic outlook are of concern, to be sure. The trade dispute with China is having an impact on both the U.S. and global economies. Still, growth near its estimated sustainable rate is continuing. Excerpt: “Even with these trade-related impediments, real GDP grew 2 percent in the second quarter, a bit above my estimate of its sustainable rate. And economic forecasts, which incorporate the effects of tariffs and slower global growth on the U.S. economy, expect growth to continue in real terms at close to 2 percent.” Takeaway: Responding to the risks to the outlook with too much monetary accommodation entails costs, and introduces risks of its own. One such risk is the potential build-up of economic instability as households and firms respond to lower interest rates by taking on too much debt. Excerpt: “The current situation involves pushing rates lower when asset prices, and in particular some risky asset prices, already seem inflated. I don’t see current financial risks as causing a downturn, but such conditions have the potential to amplify a downturn should it occur. […] Additional accommodation is not needed for an economy where labor markets are already tight – and risks further inflating the prices of riskier assets, and encouraging households and firms to take on what may be too much leverage.” Takeaway: The costs of credit conditions that are too accommodative can appear in unexpected places. One potential financial stability risk has to do with an evolving market model of co-working spaces in many major urban office markets. Excerpt: “This is an important time in the cycle to be thinking about structures and situations that could challenge financial stability in a downturn. The combination of reaching for yield with runnable liabilities is a common problem in financial stability situations. It’s important to think about the potential for runs on commercial real estate stemming from a situation where short-term leases might not be renewed in recession, and long-term leases are no longer economically viable. Interest rates play into the situation, as low rates potentially lead to a reach for yield, and building owners are more willing to lease to SPEs to get higher returns (rents) at a time when capitalization rates are quite low.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords Monetary policy accommodation , Accommodative monetary conditions , Economic Conditions , Target federal funds rate , Commercial real estate , Evolving market models , Co-working office space , Special purpose entities

Exploring Economic Conditions and the Implications for Monetary Policy By Eric S. Rosengren October 11, 2019 Madison, WI University of Wisconsin-Madison Symposium University of Wisconsin-Madison Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Takeaway: The economy faces elevated risks, including trade disruptions and geopolitical concerns. But overall, the economy is close to where many policymakers expected it would be, with the U.S. at full employment and inflation trending toward the Fed’s target. Excerpt: “Overall, then, the economy has evolved about as expected, despite the unanticipated increase in tariffs and the slower growth of exports and business fixed investment. Moreover, recent monetary policy easing is likely to provide some stimulus over the next several quarters. … In sum, the U.S. economy is now very close to meeting the Fed’s Congressional mandate of full employment and stable prices (which we define as 2 percent inflation).” Takeaway: Strong consumer spending – bolstered by plentiful jobs, growth in personal income, and increases in household wealth – has fueled the U.S. economic expansion. The key question is, will consumption continue to offset other challenges? Excerpt: “Sustaining growth at potential depends on the U.S. consumer continuing to offset the weakness we are seeing in exports and business fixed investment. … While U.S. consumers have been resilient to date, continued resilience is not guaranteed. So it is important to consider whether the economy can continue on its quite favorable path – with growth around potential, tight labor markets, and inflation near the Fed’s target of 2 percent.” Despite risks to growth, policymakers can afford to be patient and evaluate incoming data before further cutting interest rates. Right now, more cuts don’t appear needed, as many forecasters expect growth close to potential – and policy is already accommodative. Excerpt: “My forecast for the economy does not envision additional easing being necessary. However, should risks materialize and economic growth slow materially, to below the potential rate, I would be prepared to support aggressive easing… To me, it seems appropriate to continue to closely monitor incoming data to determine if the forecast of growth around potential is likely to be achieved, or if the risks I have outlined are indeed materializing.” Takeaway: Regarding financial indicators, many see the decline in 10-year Treasury bond yields as a sign of an impending slowdown, but an alternative explanation is that low foreign long-term rates are leading to lower U.S. rates. Other financial indicators run counter to worries about a slowdown, including robust stock prices and the restrained spread between corporate and Treasury bond yields. Excerpt: “Very low (and in some cases negative) foreign long-term rates are playing a role in pushing down U.S. long rates, as foreign investors move money from low-rate economies into the (relatively) high-rate U.S. markets, pushing down U.S. yields. … Other financial indicators do not portend a significant slowdown.” Takeaway: There are risks to “easing too much,” or lowering interest rates too aggressively. One risk involves unintended consequences of chasing higher returns or “reaching-for-yield.” Excerpt: “While the risks to the global and U.S. economies remain, there are also risks to easing too aggressively, as I’ve highlighted in previous speeches. Ever-lower interest rates could encourage reaching-for-yield behavior at exactly the wrong stage of the economic cycle. This remains an important consideration factoring into my views on the elements policymakers must weigh and balance at this complex time for our economy.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords monetary policy , Economic Conditions , Global Economy , Employment Report , Risks to the Economic Outlook , interest rates , Financial Indicators , reaching for yield

Financial Stability and Regulatory Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment By Eric S. Rosengren November 11, 2019 Oslo, Norway Prepared for the next crisis? The costs and benefits of financial regulation Norges Bank and International Banking, Economics and Finance Association Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Takeaway: It is important at this stage of the business cycle to assess whether our economies are prepared for a hypothetical next downturn, and consider whether policymakers have built sufficient resilience into the financial system. Excerpt: “ One significant difference between now and previous cycles is the low level of interest rates in the United States, Germany, and Japan. […] The low interest rate environment that many developed countries face requires policymakers to re-examine other economic buffers.” Takeaway: One effect of the low interest rate environment is that monetary policy buffers are diminished. For instance, in the event of a hypothetical downturn, policymakers have little room to try to stimulate the economy by reducing short-term rates. Excerpt: “Given the current diminished monetary policy buffer, recessions may be deeper and recoveries slower than what we have experienced historically, unless additional buffers are provided by fiscal, regulatory, and financial stability policies and deemed appropriate to utilize by policymakers.” Takeaway: The diminished capacity of monetary policy to offset shocks implies policymakers also need to carefully examine regulatory and financial stability tools. But the policies and tools that may have been appropriate during a downturn in a high interest rate environment are not likely to be sufficient in a low interest rate environment. Excerpt: “ For several reasons, a low interest rate environment makes it more difficult to exit recessions. This difficulty is due not just to the smaller monetary policy buffer, but also to the fact that a low interest rate environment encourages greater household and firm leverage that will amplify the severity of a downturn, should it occur.” Takeaway: Steps that increase capital would put banks in a better position to handle an economic downturn, and hopefully, better-capitalized banks would help compensate for limited monetary and fiscal policy buffers. Excerpt: “ I am not sure that recent developments and proposals in bank regulation properly reflect the risks we are likely to face in a low interest rate environment that challenges bank profitability and provides less by way of monetary policy buffers. Specifically, capital buffers should be rising now so that there is more room for them to decline if the economy falters. While this is true for the United States, it may be even more true in Japan and Europe.” Takeaway: In a low interest rate environment, corporations and households have more incentive to add debt. Meanwhile, a greater global willingness to pursue higher yields creates a ready market for highly leveraged loans. This excessive leverage could amplify the economic problems that arise in a downturn. Excerpt: “I believe U.S. policymakers would do well to explore ways that policies could be used to prevent the buildup of leverage in a low-rate environment, hopefully reducing the macroeconomic spillover that could result from over-levered households and firms.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords financial stability , bank regulation , Countercyclical Capital Buffer , Economic Conditions , Global Economy , Low Interest Rate Environment , Leverage , Financial Stability Tools
