Governor Lael Brainard At the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, D.C. Share We recognize the potential of distributed ledger technology, or blockchain, to transform the way financial market participants transfer, store, and maintain ownership records of digitized assets. The genuinely innovative aspect of distributed ledger technology combines a number of core elements that can be used to support the transfer process and distributed recordkeeping for digital assets and digital representations of assets. These elements include peer-to-peer networking and distributed data records, which provide broadly shared access to a single ledger across participants in the system, so that all participants maintain a shared, accurate history of all transactions in the system. In addition, cryptography provides a secure way to initiate a valid transaction as well as to securely transmit and store data. And consensus algorithms provide a process for transactions to be confirmed and added to the single ledger, which is an important feature when more than one participant has permission to propose updates to the ledger. We are paying close attention to distributed ledger technology, or blockchain, recognizing this may represent the most significant development in many years in payments, clearing, and settlement. 1 The Federal Reserve Board has established a working group that is engaged in a 360-degree analysis of financial innovation across the broad range of our responsibilities, drawing on engagement with industry stakeholders and on expertise from across the Federal Reserve System, including in supervision, consumer protection, financial stability and information technology. One important area of oversight is the payments system, where technology changes are viewed through the prism of our responsibilities for promoting the safety and efficiency of the payments and settlements systems; supervising financial institutions engaged in payments, clearing and settlement; and safeguarding financial stability. We want to maintain public confidence in the payments system, while supporting innovation that provides broadly shared benefits to the public over time, including through the reduction of unnecessary frictions, costs, and delays. Illustrative Use Cases Let me briefly mention a few of the use cases that we have explored in our discussions with industry stakeholders in order to illustrate the potential of distributed ledger technologies to improve payments, clearing, and settlement, as well as the considerations that are important to us in our assessment of benefits and risks. In cross-border payments and trade finance, significantly faster processing and reduced costs relative to the long and opaque intermediation chains associated with current methods of correspondent banking are promising potential benefits of the technology. Reducing intermediation steps in cross-border payments may help decrease time, costs, and counterparty risks and may materially diminish opacity, for instance by enabling small businesses or households remitting payments across borders to see the associated transfer costs and processing times up front. In trade finance, where document-intensive processes are not fully automated, distributed ledger technology may be able to reduce significant costs and speed up processing associated with issuing and tracking letters of credit and associated documents. To see the full potential of this technology realized for cross-border payments, it will be important to identify and track identities associated with the transactions, which in itself may be facilitated by the use of distributed ledgers, depending on their design. In securities markets, the industry is exploring activities ranging from the issuance of securities on a distributed ledger, to the clearing and settlement of trades, to tracking and administering corporate actions. For securities clearing and settlement in particular, the potential shift to one master record shared "simultaneously" among users of a distributed ledger-based system could be compelling. Sharing one immutable record may have the potential to reduce or even eliminate the need for the reconciliation of multiple records linked to a single trade among and between dealers and other organizations. In concept, such technology could lead to greater transparency, reduced costs, and faster settlement. Likewise, distributed ledgers may improve collateral management by improving the tracking of ownership and transactions. Nonetheless, as is frequently true in the complex arena of payments, clearing, and settlement, we can also expect that practical details covering a host of technical, business, and market issues will have an important role in determining how new technologies ultimately perform. For commodities and derivatives, there are projects to streamline some of the more antiquated corners of the markets. In markets that are heavily paper-based and lack any central means for coordination, distributed ledger technology could potentially be leveraged to provide coordination that facilitates exchange, clearing, and settlement of obligations. A related development is the potential coupling of distributed ledger protocols with self-execution and possibly self-enforcement of contractual clauses, using so-called "smart contracts." To take a familiar example, for a corporate bond with a specified par value, tenor, and coupon payment stream, a smart contract would automatically execute payments on the specified schedule to the assigned owner over the life of the bond. Although the idea of automating certain aspects of contracts is not new, and banks do some of this today, the potential introduction of smart contracts does raise several issues for consideration. For example, what is the legal status of a smart contract, which is written in code? Would consumers and businesses rely on smart contracts to perform certain services traditionally done by their banks or other intermediaries? Could the widespread automated interaction of multiple counterparties lead to any unwanted dynamics for financial markets? These and other considerations will be important factors in determining the extent of the application of smart contracts. Regardless of the application, much of the industry is at a "proof of concept" stage of development. These proofs of concept are often simple, experimental uses of the technology on a small scale that help stakeholders understand the potential and limitations of the technology for a specific purpose, which in turn typically lead to refinements and more developed proofs of concept. As such, many potential applications are in their infancy, and the industry may still be several years away from an application that is ready to be fully implemented. Even so, the industry seems to be making announcements daily on new proofs of concept and progress that may lead to pilots, so that timeline could accelerate. In some cases, there have been announcements the technology will be used within the next year or two in actual production environments. The initial relatively simple proofs of concept must be followed by much more complex demonstrations in real-world situations before these technologies can be safely deployed in today's highly interconnected, synchronized, and far-reaching financial markets. Although many private and inward-facing projects are being explored, the industry has also recognized the need to collaborate at early stages of development. An important positive development is that industry participants are actively engaging with each other to look for common approaches. Some groups are creating standards that facilitate common platforms to enable greater interoperability of often proprietary applications that are built on them and interoperate through application program interfaces, or APIs. In coming months and years, innovators, investors, and financial practitioners will no doubt make important strides in addressing key challenges such as adopting common standards, achieving interoperability between and among legacy systems and evolving distributed ledgers, improving scalability and computational throughput, and improving cryptographic security. These are positive developments that we will monitor closely. Managing Risks All of this activity demonstrates that we are in a very innovative period. The industry is eager to get on with adopting the various possibilities that distributed ledger technology may bring. However, established players and, increasingly, new entrants understand that there are important guardrails that have been carefully developed over many years in the arena of payments, clearing, and settlement. The safety and soundness of financial institutions, safety and efficiency of the payment system, and broader financial stability are critical to a healthy financial environment that fosters innovation with broad public benefits over the long run. We expect the private sector to bear important responsibility for developing and deploying new financial technologies in a safe and sound manner, even as we all seek an innovative and efficient payment system over the long run. The deployment of any new financial technology must be undertaken with a thorough understanding and management of risks. Like many new financial technologies, distributed ledgers could ameliorate or exacerbate traditional financial risks. What matters to us as policymakers and regulators is not only whether the migration to a new technological platform increases or reduces risks, but also whether risks are rendered more or less opaque, and how they are distributed among and between financial intermediaries and end users. In the payments, clearing, and settlement arena, some important risk areas for consideration include settlement, operations, and cybersecurity, as well as money laundering and terrorist financing. In managing risks, important considerations include system resiliency and governance as well as the role of licensing in ensuring proper oversight. In securities settlements, for example, a difference in timing between the delivery of securities and the delivery of funds introduces settlement risk between counterparties and other institutions involved in this process. To the extent that distributed ledger technologies are designed to supplant the traditional reliance on trusted intermediaries to ensure settlement, they will need to reliably demonstrate their ability to mitigate or even eliminate settlement risk, especially in cases where the delivery of the securities and the associated payment take place on different platforms. Traditional payment, clearing, and settlement are subject to operational risk, and it is critically important that new technologies operate reliably, securely, and with integrity. The daily operation of markets and their clearing and settlement functions are built on trust and confidence. Market participants trust that clearing and settlement functions and institutions will work properly every day. Confidence has built over time that when market participants trade, accurate and timely clearing and settlement will follow. Thus, robust security is an important element of any system. The distributed nature of this new technology, combined with the fact that many connected participants can update the shared ledger, means that end-point security is another critical component of any successful implementation of the technology. Adverse actors that can take over a participant's access to the ledger remains a key security concern, as thefts of cryptographic keys in Bitcoin continue to demonstrate. Thus, advances in cryptography will remain a key priority to enable widespread adoption of distributed ledger technologies, along with systems for securing private keys, the management of access to private keys, and differentiated permissions for participants in the system to read and write to the ledger. Recent episodes have illustrated the importance of having protocols agreed at the outset to determine whether and under what circumstances to reverse transactions once they have been recorded in a distributed master ledger. Finally, it will be important that users and administrators of distributed ledger technologies can meet their responsibilities to combat money laundering, terrorist financing, and other key law enforcement concerns. Some of the new technologies would potentially allow authorized access to certain data records in a much more efficient manner than has previously been possible. For example, distributed ledgers could be developed to collect personally identifiable information and country identifiers that enable banks to identify and report on suspicious activity. It will be important that these new technological developments and their implementation perform in a safe and sound manner that is transparent and satisfies regulatory requirements. While prevention will remain the preferred approach, realistically, resiliency and recovery will also need to be high-priorities. Indeed, many firms have suggested that the distributed data storage concept has the potential to increase the level of resiliency and data integrity. The basic idea is it should be harder to corrupt multiple copies of the same data simultaneously such that digital ledgers could reduce the vulnerability associated with a single point of failure. We must press firms and experts to identify the strengths and vulnerabilities of this concept, even as we all look for ways to make databases more secure and resilient. In an interesting development, some financial institutions have also begun to consider using distributed ledgers to back up critical databases and enable quick recovery from potentially virulent cyberattacks. We will be interested in whether such techniques can make new contributions to cybersecurity. Overall, the public needs to have confidence that any system employing distributed ledgers will operate properly, particularly in stressed conditions, and know that when adverse scenarios do occur, there will be robust management and governance to respond effectively. Recent events, such as thefts from accounts on distributed ledger platforms, highlight the challenge that distributed ledgers may have when adverse scenarios occur and there is uncertainty around what an appropriate response would be. Such uncertainty around management and governance can raise doubts about the integrity of a system employing distributed ledgers. Traditionally, financial regulators in the United States have been given licensing authority as a key way of ensuring that responsibility for managing risks is transparently assigned with appropriate oversight. The development of new business models associated with evolving financial technologies has raised questions about the applicability of existing licenses and their adequacy to new business models. For instance, the Monetary Authority of Singapore recently issued a consultation paper that proposes an activity-based payments framework as a way to address the introduction of non-traditional payment providers. 2 The United States has seen several noteworthy recent developments, including the New York State Department of Financial Services' BitLicense, a distributed ledger company, securing Federal Reserve Bank of New York approval for participation in the National Settlement Service, and, most recently, discussion by the OCC of a limited-purpose charter. Ongoing Engagement Because of the notable potential of distributed ledger technology, financial authorities, both domestic and international, will follow these developments with keen interest. At the Federal Reserve, we expect to publish a research paper later this year that summarizes some of the key findings from our industry engagement so far. Going forward, we will continue to deepen our engagement with a range of financial institutions, technologists, multi-stakeholder consortia, and academic experts to refine our understanding of the new technologies, along with their possibilities and limitations, with a particular focus on our responsibilities for the payments system, as well as our oversight of financial market intermediaries. We will also continue to discuss these issues with other central banks and authorities around the world. We will work together to foster socially beneficial innovation, while insisting that risks are thoroughly understood, managed, and controlled. I am grateful to David Mills for his assistance in preparing this text. 1. See http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20160414a.htm . Also, see the forthcoming Feds working paper, "Staff Study on Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement," 2016. Return to text 2. See www.mas.gov.sg/~/media/resource/publications/consult_papers/2016/Proposed Activity Based Payments Framework and Establishment of a National Payments Council.pdf . Return to text Last Update: October 07, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "Evolution of Work," a convening cosponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Freelancers Union, New York, New York Share Watch live at https://www.facebook.com/newyorkfed/ I would like to thank Bill Dudley and Sara Horowitz for inviting me to participate in today's conference. The subject we are tackling today--the evolution of work--is a particular interest of mine and is a matter of great importance to the Federal Reserve. The Congress has mandated the Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy so as to promote maximum employment and stable prices. Our dual mandate recognizes the importance of work in enabling people to contribute to the financial security of their family and the prosperity of their community and the country overall. Moreover, there is a long-standing recognition that secure and dignified work provides a key sense of purpose and worth. Understanding the changing nature of employment in today's economy is not only central to the mission of the Federal Reserve, but also goes to the core of who we are as providers for our families and productive members of society. 1 In contrast to traditional work arrangements, in which an employee has a durable employment relationship with a single primary employer, a large and growing proportion of the workforce is working through contracting, temporary arrangements, on-call arrangements, or as freelancers being hired for episodic "gigs." Broadly speaking, contingent arrangements are more transitory than traditional arrangements, in the extreme consisting of a single transaction or gig. They often provide considerably greater flexibility than long-term employment contracts, allowing workers and employers to move in and out of work relationships easily. Depending on the nature of the employment relationship, this enhanced flexibility could have benefits and costs that accrue to workers and employers very differently. Although they have always been a feature of the American economic landscape, there has been a sharp increase in the prevalence of contingent working arrangements over the past decade, and it is too early to tell how much of this acceleration is a cyclical phenomenon associated with the Great Recession or reflects a structural trend. The growing share and variety of contingent work has important implications for policy and puts a premium on data and research exploring this topic. For monetary policy, the growth of contingent work affects the way we assess maximum employment and the way we interpret important labor market outcomes, such as the level of part-time employment and aggregate hours worked. Depending on the contractual arrangements, it may also have important implications for economic security and the behavior of households as consumers and savers. Richer and timely data and analysis could help guide employers, workers, and public officials toward outcomes where benefits and risks are better understood and managed. What Do We Know about Contingent Work? Official measures of the changing nature of work have not kept pace with the evolution of the economy. But thanks to some cutting-edge researchers, several of whom are present today, there is a growing foundation of analysis. Last year, Larry Katz and Alan Krueger conducted a version of the Contingent Worker Survey (CWS) to track alternative and nonstandard work arrangements using the RAND American Life Panel. 2 Their findings are striking: Over the past decade, contingent workers have increased by roughly one-half and now make up 16 percent of the workforce. This rapid increase is in marked contrast to the preceding decade, when contingent workers remained at a relatively stable 10 percent of the workforce, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) CWS. 3 They conclude that all of the net growth in aggregate employment in the decade leading up to 2015 can be accounted for by contingent work arrangements, which means there has been no net employment growth in traditional work arrangements. Given that this period spanned the Great Recession and the first five years of a slow recovery, it naturally raises the question of how much of the large recent shift toward contingent work is attributable to cyclical factors, as opposed to structural forces that may be here to stay. 4 Long before the advent of firms such as Uber and TaskRabbit, ‎many individuals worked in contingent arrangements, such as freelancing and contracting, and it is these groups that have increased their share of the workforce most notably over the past decade. The largest increase in contingent work over this time has been among workers whose services are contracted out by another company, which rose from 0.6 percent to 3.1 percent of the workforce. There was also a large increase in workers who are independent contractors, consultants, or freelancers, whose share grew from 6.9 percent in 2005 to 8.4 percent in 2015. On-call workers expanded from 1.7 percent to 2.6 percent of the workforce. 5 Over this same period, technological platforms have emerged that are transforming the way people identify, schedule, and engage in contingent work and are also helping people to monetize their assets to generate income. These developments, under the rubric of the "gig," "on-demand," "platform," or "sharing" economy, have the potential to be transformative. Although the data are still relatively sparse, it appears that the number of workers using online platforms to secure gigs is still small but is growing quickly. 6 Katz and Krueger found that workers who provide services through three online intermediaries accounted for only 0.5 percent of all workers in 2015. Diana Farrell and Fiona Greig (2016) reach a similar conclusion, using a unique and rich data set. 7 The Federal Reserve Board fielded a survey to better understand the many ways adults are generating income, regardless of their employment status and the frequency of these activities. The survey uses an expansive concept of contingent work, capturing all of the activity individuals are undertaking to generate income. The Enterprising and Informal Work Activity survey, or EIWA, suggests that more than a third--36 percent--of the adult population undertook informal paid work activity either as a complement to, or as a substitute for, more traditional and formal work arrangements. 8 Similarly, a survey undertaken by Upwork and the Freelancers Union that also uses an expansive definition of contingent work finds that 35 percent of the labor force engages in freelance work. 9 The Upwork survey provides further insight by subdividing the 35 percent of the labor force who have done some form of informal work over the past 12 months into five categories. In the categories most comparable with the Katz and Krueger CWS categories, roughly 12 percent of the workforce identify as independent contractors who do not have an employer and engage in project-by-project work, whereas between 2 and 3 percent are traditional contract or temporary workers who have a single employer or project at a time and whose work status is temporary. By contrast, roughly half of the Upwork respondents do informal work in addition to traditional employment relationships; almost 10 percent derive their income from multiple different types of arrangements, including both traditional employment relationships and freelancing, while about 9 percent report having a full-time traditional job and "moonlighting" to gain additional income on top of that. The group that derives income from multiple different types of jobs has evidenced the fastest growth over the last few years covered by the survey. In addition, 2.5 percent identify as business owners. Finally, the EIWA survey provides valuable insights into the use of recent technologies in informal work. The EIWA survey suggests that over the previous six months, roughly 11 percent of adults in the United States have engaged in paid services using an online platform, such as arranging transportation activities with companies such as Uber, arranging work opportunities on sites like Care.com, Amazon Mechanical Turk, or TaskRabbit, generating projects through companies such as Fiverr, selling goods and crafts on sites such as eBay and Etsy, and renting rooms or homes through services like Airbnb, among others. 10 This figure is much larger than the Katz and Krueger finding of 0.5 percent, partly because the EIWA survey was fielded to all adults regardless of their formal employment status, asked about all online paid services, and used a six-month look-back period, rather than the past week. Who Is Engaging in Contingent Work and Why? Together, these recent surveys of informal work paint a varied picture of the universe of informal work arrangements, along with participants' motivations for engaging in them. Nineteen percent of informal workers in the EIWA survey, for example, were engaged in three or more online and/or offline informal paid work activities in the prior six months, and 25 percent indicated that informal and contingent work activities have been "very much" or "somewhat" a regular and consistent source of their monthly income. Results regarding the ages of workers attracted to nontraditional work vary: Katz and Krueger find that the share of contingent work arrangements increases with age, while the Upwork study finds that freelancing is more prevalent among the young. The earnings experiences of contingent workers appear to span a wide range. Katz and Krueger find that those engaged in contingent work tend to be concentrated in the highest income quintiles. But while independent contractors and contract workers earn relatively high wages, on-call and temporary-help work tends to occur among workers in lower wage quintiles. One common theme that emerges is the desire to earn extra money, which is a primary motivation for 74 percent of part-time, and 68 percent of full-time, freelancers in the Upwork survey. Similarly, in the EIWA survey, 65 percent of informal workers reported that earning income was their main reason for engaging in informal and contingent work, and the EIWA provides many examples that corroborate this result. 11 A full-time restaurant cook in his 50s, reports that he does yard work and sells items both online and offline to earn extra income and to help family members. He averages 60 hours per month from side and gig work and reported that these earnings constitute 75 percent of his household's monthly earnings. Similarly, a respondent in her 20s works part time as a dental hygienist and supplements this employment with about 8 hours per month of additional gig work. She said that the gig work somewhat mitigated the effect of the Great Recession, which found her working fewer hours, with stagnant wages and a loss of benefits. For others, work-life balance considerations seem to play a significant role in choosing contingent work arrangements. For example, a mother in her 20s reported spending 12 hours per month selling self-crafted items online, babysitting, and completing online tasks, collectively providing about 20 percent of her family's income. She reported that her main reason for participating in the gig economy is to be home with her daughter. Many others find themselves in highly variable work arrangements not by preference but because of the requirements of their employers. As employers have outsourced noncore tasks to contract firms and moved to technologically enabled "just-in-time" scheduling of employees, contract workers and on-call workers have had to adjust to variable and sometimes unpredictable hours. As these stories indicate, there are a variety of reasons workers engage in alternative and nonstandard work arrangements. Many individuals use the flexibility and enhanced connectivity of new technology-enabled platforms to pursue expanded opportunities. While some supplement their traditional job, using their free time to earn extra income, others cobble together contingent work arrangements or gigs to generate necessary income in the absence of traditional work opportunities. Still others move into contingent work arrangements due to their employers' work requirements. While some workers seem to appreciate the greater opportunities contingent work arrangements provide, others engage in this work out of necessity because they appear unable to obtain a full-time traditional work arrangement that meets their needs. Overall, the Upwork study finds that 63 percent of freelancers say they are pursuing this type of work by choice, while 37 percent do it out of necessity. It is unclear whether this outcome would hold true of the more tightly defined population in the Katz and Krueger survey. Implications of a Growing Gig Economy If market forces and technology are driving the growing prevalence of gig work, these trends will likely continue, and policymakers must better understand these changes. A natural starting point is measurement. There is some good news on this front, as the BLS is preparing to field a CWS in May 2017 for the first time since 2005. Better data should help deepen our understanding of how the growth of contingent work is changing the behavior of workers and employers and what these developments imply for the overall economy and household welfare. From a macroeconomic perspective, we should be attuned to the possibility that the growth in flexible work arrangements may alter the natural rate of employment and how the labor market reacts to shocks as we assess the cyclical behavior of important aggregates--such as labor force participation, employment, hours worked, and underemployment. One possibility is that new technologies, by lowering the barriers to workforce entry, could raise employment and labor force participation. Because there are fixed costs to obtaining and maintaining a job--such as searching for the job, learning about the job, and traveling to the job site every workday--the traditional work arrangement embeds incentives for individuals to work only one job, thus minimizing these fixed costs. And for those individuals who desire to work relatively few hours, these fixed costs in the past may have led to a decision to remain out of the labor force. But if technology makes it less costly for individuals to find work, manage multiple work relationships, and flexibly work more or fewer hours as their schedule permits, this could significantly increase workers' options and have important effects on labor market behavior. Importantly, any such increases in participation and employment would likely be structural, not cyclical, enabling the economy to run at a sustainably higher level. New technologies could also make it easier for individuals' actual hours to match their desired hours of work in a day or a week. Instead of seeing hours per week bunched around 40, we may see greater variation in the hours that individuals work. Lower barriers to workforce entry may make it more attractive for more individuals to work only a few hours a week if they desire--and can afford--to do so. At the same time, by making it easier to find additional work, new technologies may lead to more individuals working greater-than-full-time hours every week. In addition, we may see individuals changing the number of hours they work more frequently, as these changes become less costly. Both the EIWA and Upwork surveys confirm that gig work does, indeed, lower barriers to workforce entry and increase hours and flexibility for some individuals. The increasing prevalence of gig work may also affect the unemployment rate and productivity. To the extent that gigs provide an easy entryway to employment, unemployment may decrease. However, if gig work is less stable, it may increase job loss. The net effect on unemployment is, thus, unclear. Regarding productivity, gig work could lower aggregate productivity to the extent that it requires less human capital or specialized knowledge than traditional jobs, or if it primarily increases hours worked by lower-skilled individuals. That said, gig work, especially when enabled by new technologies, may allow hours to respond more flexibly to changes in demand and individuals to more easily connect with many different clients or employers. As a result, workers' downtime and the time required to acquire new clients and manage existing clients may decrease, in which case resource utilization and productivity may increase. It is also possible that the increasing prevalence of gig work will cause the cyclical behavior of unemployment, participation, and the workweek to change, with implications for how we assess the amount of slack. We know that contingent work increases when the economy worsens. If new technologies make it easier to find gig work, then we could see unemployment rise less in recessions, to the extent that gig workers are counted as employed. However, it could be that individuals who are able to avoid unemployment through contingent work would still be underemployed if it is difficult to cobble together enough gigs to achieve full-time employment. This would likely show up as lower average workweeks and higher levels of involuntary part-time employment during downturns. As a result, cyclical changes in resource utilization could be reflected less in movements in the unemployment rate and more in variation in hours per worker. Beyond the behavior of macroeconomic variables, it is unclear how the growth of different types of gig work affects the welfare of workers. Welfare should increase in cases where gig work meets the needs of workers by providing a low-barrier means of accessing employment and by allowing workers to better match actual hours worked with desired hours of work, especially if the gig work is available at times and in places where traditional work opportunities are in short supply. There is some evidence that this has, indeed, been the case. For example, 24 percent of informal workers in the EIWA survey indicated that contingent work had offset their spells of unemployment, loss of working hours, loss of benefits, or frozen wages in their formal employment "very much" or "somewhat." In addition, three-fourths of Uber drivers say that the greater control over their work schedules that Uber allows has made their lives better. 12 However, there are likely many workers who would prefer regular full-time traditional work to contingent work, particularly if much of the power in determining hours worked in alternative work arrangements belongs to the employer. Technological advances have enabled firms to use just-in-time strategies for their employees, making them in effect on-call workers. This is a rising trend in industries such as retail and food preparation. Several recent articles describe the challenges faced by these just-in-time workers, who must conform their hours to the daily and even hourly ebbs and flows of business, often not knowing whether they will have work on a given day until they call in that morning to inquire. 13 These arrangements can leave workers scrambling to patch together child care, elder care, and transportation to meet the often unpredictable demands of their workplace, while making it difficult to engage in regularly scheduled activities to enhance their income and opportunities, such as a second job or career training. While such workers often are not given full-time work, they often must make themselves available to work full-time hours. According to one survey, 71 percent of retail workers in New York stated that their hours fluctuated from week to week, while half said their employers could change their hours at will. 14 It is also notable that the increase in contingent work over the past decade has coincided with an increase of one-third in the share of employees working part time but who would prefer to work full time from 3 percent prior to the Great Recession to close to 4 percent today. In addition, contingent workers may receive lower wages, less training, and fewer benefits than their counterparts with traditional jobs. Typically, the wages of low-skilled employees within a company are boosted by social norms regarding pay equity, and nonpecuniary benefits are often equalized across a company's employees, in certain cases as mandated by law. 15 However, the wages that contractors receive are unlikely to reflect the same equity considerations. Moreover, contingent work generally does not offer employer-based benefits and workplace protections that come with traditional employment opportunities, like overtime compensation, minimum wage protections, health insurance, family leave, employer-sponsored retirement plans, workers' compensation, and paid sick leave. As a result, for some, contingent work may entail greater risks than in traditional full-time employment, with more variable and less predictable hours and earnings. The Upwork study notes that one of freelancers' biggest concerns is managing income variability and benefits. For lower-income workers, unpredictable fluctuations in income can lead to severe hardship. The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, for example, finds that 46 percent of households report that they would need to borrow money or sell something in order to pay an unexpected expense of $400. 16 These findings suggest that employers, policymakers, and workers should seek ways to help individuals better manage the risks inherent in most forms of contingent work. For example, we may need to enhance social safety net programs, such as unemployment and disability insurance, to better support some types of contingent work. Another possibility is to make benefits, such as health insurance and retirement saving, portable across different employers. We may also want to encourage the additional saving that many contingent workers need to ensure that their basic consumption needs are not sacrificed when demand for their work declines, perhaps by providing monetary or other types of incentives. Closing Thoughts The apparent trend toward contingent work has recently coincided with new advances in technology that can potentially amplify this trend and push it in new directions. We are still at an early stage in these developments, and it is too soon to say how these changes will play out. But the effects on the labor market could be long lasting and significant. Taking into account the potentially varied effects of the rising prevalence of gig work on household welfare, public policy should strive to maximize the benefits of the greater flexibility and lower entry barriers provided by advances in technology, while addressing the risks that currently accompany many forms of gig employment. Going forward, better data will be necessary, along with detailed research and analysis, in order to enable workers, employers, and policymakers to guide these changes in the labor market in a direction that ensures the benefits are broadly shared and the risks are well understood and well managed. References Ansel, Bridget (2015). " The Pitfalls of Just-in-Time Scheduling ," Washington Center for Equitable Growth, January 27. Bracha, Anat, and Mary A. Burke (2014). " Informal Work Activity in the United States: Evidence from Survey Responses (PDF) ," Current Policy Perspectives 14-13. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December. Bracha, Anat, Mary A. Burke, and Arman Khachiyan (January 2015). " Changing Patterns in Informal Work Participation in the United States 2013-2015 (PDF) ," Current Policy Perspectives 15-10. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October. Carrillo, Dani, Kristen Harknett, Allison Logan, Sigrid Luhr, and Daniel Schneider (2016). " On-Call Job, On-Call Family: The Necessity of Family Support among Retail Workers with Unstable Work Schedules (PDF) ," Working Paper 2016-11. Washington: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, November. Farrell, Diana, and Fiona Greig (2016). Paychecks, Paydays, and the Online Platform Economy: Big Data on Income Volatility. New York: JPMorgan Chase Institute, February, https://www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/document/jpmc-institute-volatility-2-report.pdf. Hall, Jonathan V., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). " An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber's Driver-Partners in the United States (PDF) ," Working Paper 587. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, January. Harris, Seth D., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). " A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The 'Independent Worker (PDF) ,' " Discussion Paper 2015-10. Washington: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, December. Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger (2016). " The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015 (PDF) ," working paper, March. Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Jacques Bughin, Kelsey Robinson, Jan Mischke, and Deepa Mahajan (2016). Independent Work: Choice, Necessity, and the Gig Economy. San Francisco: McKinsey Global Institute, October, available at http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/independent-work-choice-necessity-and-the-gig-economy. Robles, Barbara J., and Marysol McGee (2016). " Exploring Online and Offline Informal Work: Findings from the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (EIWA) Survey (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-089. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Upwork and Freelancers Union (2016). "Freelancing in America: 2016," survey results, October 6, available at https://www.upwork.com/i/freelancing-in-america/2016. U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015). Contingent Workforce: Size, Characteristics, Earnings, and Benefits. Washington: GAO, April, available at http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-168R . Wessler, Seth Freed (2014). "Shift Change: 'Just-in-Time' Scheduling Creates Chaos for Workers," NBC News, May 10, http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/shift-change-just-time-scheduling-creates-chaos-workers-n95881. I am grateful to Stephanie Aaronson, Dave Buchholz, Andrew Figura, Joseph Firschein, Arturo Gonzalez, Barbara Lipman, Barbara Robles, Marysol Weindorf, and Alison Weingarden for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. The Contingent Worker Survey is the main survey used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for tracking alternative and nonstandard work. The survey was last fielded in 2005. Return to text 3. See Katz and Krueger (2016). Return to text 4. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) study of the contingent workforce shows an increase of 5 percentage points in the share of contingent work arrangements, although this shift took place from 2006 to 2010. The GAO's definition of contingent work covers a much larger share of the workforce, 40.4 percent in 2010, than the CWS. See U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015). In the same vein, a 2014 survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found that roughly 44 percent of its survey's respondents participated in some informal paid work activity during the previous two years. See Bracha and Burke (2014). Return to text 5. See Katz and Krueger (2016). Return to text 6. See Harris and Krueger (2015). Return to text 7. By contrast, studies conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in 2013 and 2015 found that approximately one in four respondents--or more than half of informal work participants--say they earned money through informal work activities conducted online. See Bracha, Burke, and Khachiyan (2015). Return to text 8. See Robles and McGee (2016). Some informal workers in the EIWA would not meet the definition of employment in the Current Population Survey (CPS) either because they did not do work in the CPS reference week (the EIWA asks about activities over the past six months, not during the reference week) or because they would not categorize the covered activities (such as the occasional selling of goods or renting of property) as work. Return to text 9. The Upwork survey encompasses an expansive set of contingent work arrangements, even if only intermittent, over the past 12 months, and the EIWA encompasses a similar scope over the past 6 months, while Katz and Krueger confine their focus to the Current Population Survey reference week, similar to the BLS CWS. In addition, the Upwork definition is similar to the EIWA in counting as informal workers those individuals with traditional full- or part-time work who also engage in some informal work, in contrast to Katz and Krueger and the BLS CWS, which try to differentiate those workers who predominantly engage in contingent work. Return to text 10. A study by the McKinsey Global Institute suggests that 15 percent of independent workers in the United States and the European Union participate in online informal work activities. See Manyika and others (2016). Return to text 11. The responses to the survey were anonymous and confidential. Return to text 12. See Hall and Krueger (2015). Return to text 13. See Ansel (2015) and Carrillo and others (2016). Return to text 14. The 2011 survey was conducted by the Retail Action Project, cited in Wessler (2014). Return to text 15. Regulations stipulated by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and the Affordable Care Act generally mandate equal benefits provision of pension and health insurance plans across employees. Return to text 16. The survey is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm . Return to text Last Update: November 17, 2016 Back to Top

in a balanced way. We already miss her wise counsel here. I'm sure Teresa would have appreciated this conference's gathering of academics, industry participants, and policymakers to exchange information and discuss current research related to financial innovation. Why Is Fintech Important? In my remarks today, I'd like to share a few thoughts about emerging financial technologies and their relevance to our work. 1 Fintech has the potential to transform the way that financial services are delivered and designed as well as the underlying processes of payments, clearing, and settlement. 2 The past few years have seen a proliferation of new digitally enabled financial products and services, in addition to new processes and platforms. Just as smartphones revolutionized the way in which we interact with one another to communicate and share information, fintech may impact nearly every aspect of how we interact with each other financially, from payments and credit to savings and financial planning. In our continuously connected, on-demand world, consumers, businesses, and financial institutions are all eager to find new ways to engage in financial transactions that are more convenient, timely, secure, and efficient. In many cases, fintech puts financial change at consumers' fingertips--literally. Today's consumers, particularly millennials, are accustomed to having a wide range of applications, options, and information immediately accessible to them. Almost every type of consumer transaction--ordering groceries, downloading a movie, buying furniture, or arranging childcare, to name a few--can be done on a mobile device, and there are often multiple different applications that consumers can choose for each of these tasks based on their preferences. It seems inevitable for this kind of convenience, immediacy, and customization to extend to financial services. Indeed, according to the Federal Reserve Board's most recent survey of mobile financial services, fully two-thirds of consumers between the ages of 18 and 29 having a mobile phone and a bank account use mobile banking. 3 New fintech platforms are giving consumers and small businesses more real-time control over their finances. Once broad adoption is achieved, it is technologically quite simple to conduct cashless person-to-person fund transfers, enabling, among other things, the splitting of a check after a meal out with friends or the sending of remittances quickly and cheaply to friends or family in other countries. Financial management tools are automating savings decisions based on what consumers can afford, and they are helping consumers set financial goals and providing feedback on expenditures that are inconsistent with those goals. In some cases, fintech applications are automatically transferring spare account balances into savings, based on monthly spending and income patterns, effectively making savings the default choice. Other applications are providing consumers with more real-time access to earnings as they are accrued rather than waiting for their regular payday. This service may be particularly valuable to the nearly 50 percent of adults with extremely limited liquid savings. 4 It is too early to know what the overall impact of these innovations will be, but they offer the potential to empower consumers to better manage cash flow to reduce the need for more expensive credit products to cover short-term cash needs. 5 One particularly promising aspect of fintech is the potential to expand access to credit and other financial services for consumers and small businesses. By reducing loan processing and underwriting costs, online origination platforms may enable financial services providers to more cost effectively offer smaller-balance loans to households and small businesses than had previously been feasible. 6 In addition, broader analysis of data may allow lenders to better assess the creditworthiness of potential borrowers, facilitating the responsible provision of loans to some individuals and firms that otherwise would not have access to such credit. In recent years, some innovative Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) have developed partnerships with online alternative lenders, with the goal of expanding credit access to underserved small businesses. 7 The challenge will be to foster socially beneficial innovation that responsibly expands access to credit for underserved consumers and small businesses, and those who otherwise would qualify only for high-cost alternatives. It would be a lost opportunity if, instead of expanding access in a socially beneficial way, some fintech products merely provided a vehicle to market high-cost loans to the underserved, or resulted in the digital equivalent of redlining, exacerbating rather than ameliorating financial access inequities. We are also monitoring a growing fintech segment called "regtech" that aims to help banks achieve regulatory compliance more effectively. Regtech firms are designing new tools to assist banks and other financial institutions in addressing regulatory compliance issues ranging from onboarding new customers to consumer protection to payments and governance. Many of the current solutions are focused on Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) regulatory requirements, including know-your-customer (KYC) and suspicious activity reporting requirements. The solutions utilize new technologies and data-analytic techniques that may reduce the costs and time needed for banks to identify and assess customers' money-laundering and terrorist-financing risks. However, it is too early to tell the degree to which innovative approaches to customer due diligence, such as KYC utilities, will deliver efficiency gains such as those outlined in the recent Bank for International Settlements Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures report on correspondent banking. 8 Ensuring Risks Are Managed and Consumers Are Protected While financial innovation holds promise, it is crucial that financial firms, customers, regulators, and other stakeholders understand and mitigate associated risks. There is a tension between the lightning pace of development of new products and services being brought to market--sometimes by firms that are new or have not historically specialized in consumer finance--and the duty to ensure that important risks around financial services and payments are addressed. Firms need to ensure that they are appropriately controlling and mitigating both risks that are unique to fintech as well as risks that exist independently of new technologies. For example, some fintech firms are exploring the use of nontraditional data in underwriting and pricing credit products. While nontraditional data may have the potential to help evaluate consumers who lack credit histories, some data may raise consumer protection concerns. Nontraditional data, such as the level of education and social media usage, may not necessarily have a broadly agreed upon or empirically established nexus with creditworthiness and may be correlated with characteristics protected by fair lending laws. To the extent that the use of this type of data could result in unfairly disadvantaging some groups of consumers, it requires careful review to ensure legal compliance. In addition, while consumers generally have some sense of how their financial behavior affects their traditional credit scores, alternative credit scoring methods present new challenges that could raise questions of fairness and transparency. It may not always be readily apparent to consumers, or even to regulators, what specific information is utilized by certain alternative credit scoring systems, how such use impacts a consumer's ability to secure a loan or its pricing, and what behavioral changes consumers might take to improve their credit access and pricing. Similarly, fintech innovations that rely on data sharing may create security, privacy, and data-ownership risks, even as they provide increased convenience to consumers. Recent examples of large-scale fraud and cybersecurity breaches have illustrated the significance of possible security risks. As the data sets that financial institutions utilize expand beyond traditional consumer credit histories, data privacy will become a growing concern, as will data ownership and whether or not the consumer has any say over how these data are used and shared or whether he or she can review it for accuracy. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau recently issued a request for information to better understand the benefits and risks associated with new financial services that rely on access to consumer financial accounts and account-related information. 9 In addition to the risks I have outlined that are specific to new financial technologies, firms also must control for risks that have always been present, even in brick-and-mortar financial institutions. For example, risks around the BSA and Anti-Money Laundering rules cut across all segments and all portfolios. Similarly, firms must monitor credit and liquidity risks of loans acquired or processed via fintech platforms, especially given that these products have not been tested over an economic cycle. Furthermore, as a general rule, the introduction of new products or services typically involves heightened risks as a financial institution enters into new areas with which it may not have experience or that may not be consistent with its overall business strategy and risk tolerance. Banks collaborating with fintech firms must control for the risks associated with the associated new products, services, and third-party relationships. When incorporating innovation that is consistent with a bank's goals and risk tolerance, bankers will need to consider which model of engagement is most appropriate in light of their business model and risk-management infrastructure, manage any outsourced relationships consistent with supervisory expectations, 10 ensure that regulatory compliance considerations are included in the development of new products and services, and have strong fallback plans in place to limit the risks associated with products and partners that may not survive. With the growing number of partnerships between banks and fintech companies, we often receive questions about the applicability of our vendor risk-management guidance. We are actively reviewing our guidance to determine whether any adjustments or clarifications may become appropriate in the context of these arrangements. We hear concerns from community bankers in particular about their internal capacity to undertake the requisite due diligence and ongoing vendor management on their own, especially with much larger vendors, and questions about whether the interagency service providers supervision program might be relevant in this context. We are thinking about whether changes brought about by fintech and fintech partnerships may warrant consideration of any changes to the interagency supervision program for service providers. Regulatory Engagement I believe that the Federal Reserve is well-positioned to help shape this innovation as it develops, and it is important that we be clear about our expectations and mindful of the possible effects of our actions. The policy, regulatory, and supervisory decisions made by the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators can impact the ways in which new financial technologies are developed and implemented, and ultimately how effective they are. It is critical that fintech firms and financial institutions comply with all applicable legal protections and obligations. At the same time, it is important that regulators and supervisors not impose undue burdens on financial innovations that would provide broad social benefits responsibly. An unduly rigid regulatory or supervisory posture could lead to unintended consequences, such as the movement of innovations outside of the regulated banking industry, potentially creating greater risks and less transparency. The rapid pace of change and the large number of actors--both banks and nonbanks--in fintech raise questions about how to effectively conduct our regulatory and supervisory activities. In one sense, regulators' approach to fintech should be no different than for conventional financial products or services. The same basic principles regarding fairness and transparency should apply regardless of whether a consumer obtains a product through a brick-and-mortar bank branch or an online portal using a smartphone. Indeed, the same consumer laws and regulations that apply to products offered by banks generally apply to nonbank fintech firms as well, even though their business models may differ. However, the application of laws and regulations that were designed based on traditional financial products and delivery channels may give rise to complex or novel issues when applied to new products or new delivery channels. As a result, we are committed to regularly engage with firms and the technology to develop a shared understanding of these issues as they evolve. Fundamentally, financial institutions themselves are responsible for providing innovative financial services safely. Financial services firms must pair technological know-how and innovative services with a strong compliance culture and a thorough knowledge of the important legal and compliance guardrails. While "run fast and break things" may be a popular mantra in the technology space, it is ill-suited to an arena that depends on trust and confidence. New entrants need to understand that the financial arena is a carefully regulated space with a compelling rationale underlying the various rules at play, even if these are likely to evolve over time. There is more at stake in the realm of financial services than in some other areas of technological innovation. There are more serious and lasting consequences for a consumer who gets, for instance, an unsustainable loan on his or her smartphone than for a consumer who downloads the wrong movie or listens to a bad podcast. At the same time, regulators may need to revisit processes designed for a brick-and-mortar world when approaching digital finance. To ensure that fintech realizes its positive potential, regulators and firms alike should take a long view, with thoughtful engagement on both sides. When we look back at times of financial crisis or missteps, we frequently find that a key cause was elevating short-term profitability over long-term sustainability and consumer welfare. It was not long ago that so-called exotic mortgages originally designed for niche borrowers became increasingly marketed to low- and moderate-income borrowers who could not sustain them, ultimately with disastrous results. In addition to the financial consequences for individual consumers, the drive for unsustainable profit can contribute to distrust in the financial system, which is detrimental to the broader economy. It is critical that firms providing financial services consider the long-term social benefit of the products and services they offer. Concerns regarding long-term sustainability are magnified in situations where banks may bear credit or other longer-term operational risks related to products delivered by a fintech firm. One useful question to ask is whether a product's success depends on consumers making ill-informed choices; if so, or if the product otherwise fails to provide sufficient value to consumers, it is not going to be seen as responsible and may not prove sustainable over time. The key challenge for regulatory agencies is to create the right balance. Ultimately, regulators should be prepared to appropriately tailor regulatory or supervisory expectations, to the extent possible within our respective authorities, to facilitate fintech innovations that produce benefits for consumers, businesses, and the financial system. At the same time, any contemplated adjustments must also appropriately manage corresponding risks. Federal Reserve Fintech Engagement To better understand technological changes in lending, payments, and other areas, the Federal Reserve has been engaging with a wide range of market participants to understand barriers to socially beneficial innovations. Our unique structure, with Board and Reserve Bank staff in over 30 locations, allows us to tap expertise in markets and innovation centers across the country to help establish channels of communication, including with nonbank participants with whom we may not otherwise have regular contact. The Federal Reserve also engages in ongoing communication with other regulators to promote, to the greatest extent possible, consistency in approaches and alignment of supervisory requirements. Exchanging ideas and discussing fintech innovations with other regulators is critical to understanding and vetting risks and, where appropriate, reaching consistent views regarding the application of laws, regulations, or guidance. Finally, we recognize the value of technical expertise. With fintech, as with any other emerging financial product or service, the Federal Reserve is learning as much as we can to ensure that we have a robust understanding of the technologies and activities in which banks and other financial firms are engaging, and to inform the development of our policy and supervisory approaches. To that end, the Federal Reserve Board has established a multidisciplinary working group that is engaged in a 360-degree analysis of fintech innovation. We are bringing together the best thinking across the Federal Reserve System, spanning key areas of responsibility--from supervision to community development, from financial stability to payments--to assess the impact of technological development on the Federal Reserve's responsibilities. As part of this effort, Federal Reserve senior officials and staff have been closely watching developments in fintech, evaluating its impact on financial services delivery, and assessing the policy and supervisory implications in this arena. Conclusion Current developments in the digitization of finance, including the establishment of new business models, are important and deserving of serious engagement on the part of policymakers and regulators. As policymakers, we want to facilitate innovation where it has the potential to yield broad social benefit, while ensuring that risks are thoroughly managed. In safeguarding the public interest, the first line of analysis and protection will always rest with the market participants closest to the new technologies and product innovations and to the organizations that consider adopting them. But regulators also should seek to analyze the implications of technology developments through constructive and timely engagement. We should be attentive to the potential social benefits of these new technologies, prepared to make the necessary regulatory adjustments if their safety and integrity are proven and their potential benefits found to be in the public interest, and vigilant to ensure risks are well understood and managed. I am grateful to Tracy Basinger, Carol Evans, Andrew Figura, Amy Henderson, and Marysol Weindorf for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. Return to text 2. For a review of the potential of distributed ledger technologies to change payment, settlement, and clearance processes, see the forthcoming Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series paper titled "Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing and Settlement." Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016 (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors). Return to text 4. The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking finds that 46 percent of households report that they would need to borrow money or sell something in order to pay an unexpected expense of $400. The report of survey findings is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm . Return to text 5. Robo-advisors are making investing and retirement planning cheaper and more accessible, filling a particular need as the coverage of employer-provided retirement plans has declined. According to Insider Newsletter published by Willis Towers Watson (vol. 26, no. 2, February 2016), only 20 percent of Fortune 500 companies offered a defined-benefit plan to salaried new hires in 2015, down from 59 percent among the same employers in 1998. Return to text 6. For more information on fintech and small business lending, see Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, “ The State of Small Business Lending: Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation (PDF) ,” Harvard Business School Working Paper (2016). Return to text 7. Most recently, Regions Bank announced a partnership with Fundation, an online lender, and TruFund, a CDFI, to provide small-dollar loans to underserved small businesses (for more information, see http://ir.regions.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=989068 ). In 2015, Lending Club and the Opportunity Fund, a California-based CDFI, announced a partnership intended to provide $10 million in loans over a period of five months to 400 small businesses in underserved areas of California (for more information, see www.opportunityfund.org/media/blog/clinton-announces-partnership-between-opportunity-fund-and-lending-club ). Return to text 8. See www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d147.pdf . Return to text 9. See http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/112016_cfpb_Request_for_Information_Regarding_Consumer_Access_to_Financial_Records.pdf The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau believes that "consumers should be able to use their financial records and account information and securely share access in an electronic format." Return to text 10. See Supervision and Regulation Letter 13-19/Consumer Affairs Letter 13-21, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk ." Return to text Last Update: December 02, 2016 Back to Top
