Monetary, Fiscal, and Financial Stability Policy Tools: Are We Equipped for the Next Recession? By Eric S. Rosengren March 23, 2018 Washington, D.C. Tenth Conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy International Research Forum Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Speaking in Washington, D.C., Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren suggested that policymakers should view financial stability tools more holistically, and assess the ability to utilize fiscal, monetary, and financial stability policy tools to respond to a hypothetical adverse shock. Noting that the last financial crisis underscored the role financial instability can play in disrupting the economy and slowing its recovery, Rosengren said that now is the time to assess and strengthen the various policy tools available to respond to an adverse shock. Unfortunately, Rosengren said, rather than building sufficient capacity for possible downturns (which he stressed he is not predicting), in his view the U.S. has actually seen a reduction in the capacity of so-called "buffers" across the policy tools. "Policymakers need to think about and act on creating greater capacity and flexibility within the tools currently available – including those most directly related to financial stability." The Federal Reserve's monetary policy buffer, Rosengren said, has been depleted as the nominal equilibrium interest rate in the United States has fallen. Simple math suggests that given prevailing low rates, policymakers could quickly run out of room to lower the federal funds rate – and so the ability of conventional monetary policy to respond to a crisis is somewhat constrained. "I believe that policymakers should consider adjusting the monetary policy framework, to address the possibility that the capacity of conventional policy tools may be too quickly depleted," Rosengren said. He noted that fiscal policy buffers are being bolstered in some European countries as their economies improve, but that the same cannot be said for the United States. "My view is that U.S. fiscal policy we have seen since the crisis emerged in 2008 will simply give future policymakers less flexibility to respond to a hypothetical large financial stability shock with fiscal policy tools," Rosengren said. Should a shock occur, monetary policy and fiscal policy may not be expected to respond as forcefully as they did in the last financial crisis and its aftermath. This highlights how important it is that financial stability tools "provide sufficient buffers." These tools include altering the scenarios used in the bank stress tests that are applied to the largest banks, and the setting of the Countercyclical Capital Buffer. He noted that the Countercyclical Capital Buffer remains at zero, and said that with asset valuations high a non-zero buffer can be justified. "In my view, now should be the time that policymakers carefully consider this state of affairs, and assess which tools could provide more potent buffers to draw upon should a large adverse financial shock occur," Rosengren concluded. "While that is not my expectation or prediction, my view is that it is an opportune time to prepare for such a possibility." Rosengren was delivering keynote remarks at the tenth conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords financial stability , fiscal policy , Financial Shock , Inflation range , monetary policy , stress test , Countercyclical , Policy tools

The U.S. Economy: An Optimistic Outlook, But With Some Important Risks By Eric S. Rosengren April 13, 2018 Westin Boston Waterfront Economic Outlook Breakfast Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said Friday that his own economic forecast and the forecasts of his colleagues on the Fed's policy committee are "quite positive" – citing fairly strong economic growth, job creation, falling unemployment, and inflation rising close to the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target. But Rosengren detailed both short-run and longer-run risks to that positive outlook. On short-run risks, Rosengren is not forecasting significant trade disruptions or substantial boom-bust problems, but said "I think it is important to identify risks worth thinking about and watching for." "It would take a significantly broader set of trade actions than those reported to date to materially reduce the roughly $2.4 trillion in annual U.S. exports," Rosengren said. "Still, spillover effects are possible." He added that concerns about these possible disruptions likely explain some of the heightened volatility in stock prices of late. Also, an overheated "boom-bust" scenario could become more likely if unemployment moves far below where policymakers expect labor markets to settle in the long-run, Rosengren said. He noted that today's unemployment rate is below the Congressional Budget Office's estimate of the natural rate. "Periods in which unemployment dipped significantly and persistently below the estimated natural rate historically have tended to generate conditions that resulted in a recession," Rosengren said, showing the relevant historical charts. Turning to longer-run risks to the economic outlook, Rosengren said that the current status of fiscal and monetary policy buffers "call into question" their ability to work against a shock or downturn. "By using up so much fiscal capacity now – by which I mean the ability to lower tax rates or boost federal spending to offset economic weakness – the country risks not having sufficient fiscal capacity in the future when it might be needed," Rosengren said. Additionally, there is "some reason" to be concerned about how aggressively monetary policy can respond to a large adverse shock, noting the median forecast among FOMC members for longer-run interest rates is 2.9 percent – "quite low" by historical standards, resulting from slow labor force growth coupled with slow growth in productivity. "Since in many recessions we lower rates by as much as 5 percentage points, it is quite likely that interest rates would reach zero again in a downturn," Rosengren said. Rosengren is, in sum, hopeful these risks can be avoided. "The economic outlook is good, but we all must be attuned to what could go wrong in the short term and in the long term, and what that implies for appropriate monetary policy." Rosengren was speaking at the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce's Economic Outlook Breakfast 2018 in Boston, MA. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords monetary policy , Labor markets , Forecast risks , Trade policy , fiscal policy , Exports and tariffs , boom and bust , monetary buffers
