Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Forward Guidance Remarks before the Asia Society Hong Kong Center April 4, 2014 Hong Kong Speech in PDF Thank you, Alice (Mong). It is always an honor to speak before the Asia Society anywhere in the world but especially here in Hong Kong, one of my favorite cities. I was in Hong Kong during the transition ceremonies in 1997 when the White House called to ask if I would become deputy U.S. trade representative. It was a position in which I served for four years under President Clinton, and it put me on the path to high-level public service. That and my love for the spectacular food here have cemented Hong Kong in my heart. Thank you for inviting me to stop here on my way to Beijing. I want to talk today about “forward guidance” in monetary policy. It is the subject du jour of central bankers. We’ve seen it popularized by the Bank of Canada and Bank of England, and it figured prominently in the statement recently released by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve after our meeting of March 18–19 and again during the post-meeting press conference of the Fed Chair, Janet Yellen. It is front and center on the agenda of the FOMC. To understand forward guidance and its prominence in current discussions within monetary policy circles, it helps to retrace recent history. Adieu Quantitative Easing To encourage economic recovery from the debacle of the financial crisis of 2007–09, the FOMC cut interest rates to near zero. The Fed introduced an array of special lending facilities during the most panicked stage of the crisis. These credit and liquidity programs were largely self-liquidating as market functioning improved. But still being “zero bound,” we embarked upon a program of massively expanding the Fed’s balance sheet, referred to internally as “large-scale asset purchases” and popularly known as quantitative easing (QE). By buying copious quantities of longer-term U.S. Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities (MBS), our balance sheet has grown from slightly under $900 billion prior to the crisis to $4.3 trillion at present. When the Fed buys a Treasury note or bond or an MBS, we pay for it, putting money out into the economy with the expectation that the money will be used by banks and other creditors and investors to finance job-creating investment, the purchase of homes and other expansive economic activity. Thus far, much of the money we have pushed out into the economy has been stored away rather than expended to the desired degree. For example, we have seen a huge buildup in the reserves of the depository institutions of the United States. Less than a fifth of commercial credit in the highly developed U.S. capital markets is extended through depository institutions. Yet depository institutions alone have accumulated a total of $2.57 trillion in excess reserves—money that is sitting on the sidelines rather than being loaned out into the economy. That’s up from a norm of around $2 billion before the crisis. The Fed’s large-scale asset purchases dramatically and more broadly impacted credit markets. The U.S. credit markets are awash in liquidity. As of March 14, our par holdings of fixed-rate MBS exceeded 30 percent of the outstanding stock of those securities. Through these purchases, we have driven down mortgage rates and helped rekindle the U.S. housing market. We now own just shy of 24 percent of the stock of Treasury coupon securities. Having concentrated our purchases of Treasuries further out on the yield curve, and done so in size, we have driven nominal interest rates across the credit spectrum to lows not seen in over a half century. This has allowed U.S. businesses to restructure their balance sheets, manage their earnings per share through share buybacks financed with bargain-basement debt issuance, bolster stock prices through enhanced dividend payouts and position themselves for financing growth once they see the whites of the eyes of greater certainty about their economic future. By driving nominal interest rates to half-century lows, we have also reduced the hurdle rate by which future cash flows of publicly traded businesses are discounted. Thus, through financial engineering, we have helped bolster a roaring bull market for equities: The indexes for stocks have nearly tripled from the lows reached in March 2009. Alongside these signs of rebound have been some developments that give rise to caution. I have spoken of these in recent speeches, echoing concerns I have raised in FOMC discussions: The price-to-earnings (PE) ratio of stocks is among the highest decile of reported values since 1881. Bob Shiller’s inflation-adjusted PE ratio reached 26 this week as the Standard & Poor’s 500 hit yet another record high. For context, the measure hit 30 before Black Tuesday in 1929 and reached an all-time high of 44 before the dot-com implosion at the end of 1999. [1] Since bottoming out five years ago, the market capitalization of the U.S. stock market as a percentage of the country’s economic output has more than doubled to 145 percent—the highest reading since the record was set in March 2000. Margin debt has been setting historic highs for several months running and, according to data released by the New York Stock Exchange on Monday, now stands at $466 billion. [2] Junk-bond yields have declined below 5.5 percent, nearing record lows. [3] Covenant-lite lending is becoming more widespread. In my Federal Reserve District, 96 percent of which is the booming economy of Texas, bankers are reporting that money center banks are lending on terms that are increasingly imprudent. The former funds manager in me sees these as yellow lights. The central banker in me is reminded of the mandate to safeguard financial stability. As I said recently in a speech in Mexico, we must watch these developments carefully lest we become responsible for raising the ghost of irrational exuberance. It is clear to me that we have a liquidity pool that is more than sufficiently deep and wide enough nationwide to finance job-creating capital expansion and reduce labor market “slack.” But that will happen only if and when our fiscal authorities—the Congress and the president—are able to muster the courage to craft tax, spending and regulatory incentives for job-creating enterprises to mobilize liquidity for expansion and payroll growth. Thus far, inflation has yet to raise its ugly head, and inflation expectations as measured by consumer surveys and market-traded instruments have remained stolid. However, with each passing day, constantly adding massive amounts to the monetary base will inevitably present a significant challenge to the FOMC, which must ultimately manage this high-power money so that it does not become fuel for sustained inflation above the committee’s 2 percent target once it is activated and flows into the economy. Thus, I was more than supportive of the collective decision of the FOMC to begin cutting back on our rate of accumulation of assets beginning in December. Over the course of our recent meetings, we have cut back from accumulating $85 billion per month in Treasuries and MBS to a present rate of $55 billion per month. This is still somewhat promiscuous. Even with the taper, the recent decline of mortgage supply has driven our absorption of the MBS market to 85 percent of fixed-rate MBS issuance. The fall in net MBS supply is outpacing the taper. At the current reduction in the run rate of accumulation, the exercise known as QE3 will terminate in October (when I project we will hold more than 40 percent of the MBS market and almost a fourth of outstanding Treasuries). We will then be back to managing monetary policy through the more traditional tool of the overnight lending rate that anchors the yield curve. Enter Forward Guidance This is no small matter. Quantitative easing has made life easy not only for corporate treasurers and homeowners and consumers burdened by debt, but also for money market operators. It has run up the price of stocks and bonds mostly in straight-line fashion, and it has taken volatility out of the marketplace, allowing market operators and their clients to profit with little effort. The question of when and under what conditions the FOMC will begin to raise the base rate off the floor is understandably of intense interest. For example, every quarter, FOMC participants each provide forecasts of the year in which they presently think the target overnight rate will be raised, based on what they individually consider to be the proper conduct of monetary policy. This has given rise to what I consider a rabid focus on the economic projections, or “dots,” that accompany our FOMC statements on a quarterly basis. Monty Python could almost have written a sketch on the pundits’ preoccupation with the dots. [4] Truth be told, although many of us have econometric models and all of us have a phenomenal team of economists who help us develop our projections, these estimates are, in the end, largely guesswork. Especially the further out in time they go. Yet the press and the markets focus on them as though they were the writ of all-knowing, all-seeing monetary sages. On Monday night, for example, there was much ado made about Janet Yellen noting in Chicago that the central tendency of our best guesses was that full employment would be somewhere between a 5.2 and 5.6 percent unemployment rate. It is nonetheless helpful to contemplate what may be useful guideposts for deciding when to raise the base rate and how we may convey this to the markets. And so the FOMC is grappling with just what, in fact, we can provide the marketplace in the form of forward guidance about our future modus operandi. Odysseus or Apollo? Research papers have addressed this subject. For example, some academic economists draw on Greek mythology to distinguish different techniques for crafting forward guidance, making a distinction between Odyssean and Delphic forms of guidance. The Odyssean model involves committing to a policy rule or to a criterion for choosing between different policy alternatives. Policymakers tie themselves to the mast of this rule or criterion, sacrificing some of their short-run freedom of action in order to achieve what they hope will be superior outcomes over the long term. In monetary policy, commitment can in theory reduce the risk of future recession and more tightly control medium-horizon inflation expectations at the cost of a somewhat poorer near-term inflation or unemployment performance. Commitments come in lots of different flavors and styles, and forward guidance isn’t necessarily helpful or wise just because it’s Odyssean. Tying yourself to the mast isn’t an especially good idea if your ship is sinking, or if enemy forces are directing fire toward your deck. Committing to a particular path for the funds rate, or to a time schedule for funds-rate liftoff, is not something in which I or many of my colleagues have any interest. Commitments that are contingent on future economic conditions, in contrast, enjoy at least some support on the FOMC. President (Narayana) Kocherlakota of the Minneapolis Fed, for example, has notably proposed that the committee promise to delay liftoff at least until either the unemployment rate reaches 5 1/2 percent or forecasted inflation hits 2 1/4 percent (provided longer-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored, and possible risks to financial stability remain well-contained). My own view is that commitments aren’t always credible, especially if they purport to extend far into the future. It’s hard to bind future policymakers, and it’s difficult to anticipate all the various economic circumstances that might arise down the road. As a general rule, then, the further into the future a commitment extends, the vaguer it tends to be. Along these lines, the FOMC periodically reiterates its commitment to do what it is legally mandated to do: pursue full employment, price stability and a stable financial system. But getting from there to an actual prescription for the funds rate isn’t straightforward. If it were, FOMC meetings wouldn’t take eight-plus hours of discussion and hundreds of pages of briefing materials. Delphic forward guidance is less binding than Odyssean guidance. Like the responses of the oracle of Apollo at Delphi, it is more obscure, more enigmatic. It amounts to saying, “Here’s what we think we are going to want to do if the economy evolves as we currently expect.” Delphic guidance clarifies your current thinking about future policy without making any promises—even contingent promises. Our current FOMC statement is chock-full of Delphic guidance. On asset purchases: “If incoming information broadly supports the committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps ...” On the timing of liftoff: “The committee continues to anticipate ... that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends ...” On the post-liftoff path of the funds rate: “The committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the committee views as normal in the longer run.” As a former practitioner, I can tell you that market operators prefer Odyssean guidance to Delphic guidance, and within the Odyssean model, tend to prefer inflexible, calendar-based guidance to guidance that’s either conditional or qualitative. Life in my former incarnation would naturally be much more pleasant if I could dial in the specific dates and levels of interest rate movements. But as a central banker, I am haunted by a comment made by Winston Churchill in 1926, shortly before things began to unravel in the global financial markets. Speaking at the Waldorf Hotel in London, he said: “In finance, everything that is agreeable is unsound and everything that is sound is disagreeable.” [5] I worry that the predictability of calendar-based commitments can quite possibly be unsound in two key dimensions. First, the quantitative moorings may be misplaced—especially given shifts in economic relationships following the worst downturn since the Great Depression. Second, I question if it is sound policy to remove all uncertainty or volatility from the market. I wonder whether being totally predictable may, at best, lead to a false complacency that can too easily be upset should we need to change course. At its worst, I fear calendar-based commitments can lead, perversely, to market instability by encouraging markets to overshoot, as they appear to be doing in some quarters at present. I say “calendar-based commitments,” even though the FOMC has tried to couch its calendar-based guidance in Delphic language. The problem is that guidance intended to be Delphic is, in practice, often given an Odyssean interpretation. Whether because of wishful thinking by market operators or because of policymaker inertia (it’s easier to stick with the previously announced plan than to explain a departure from that plan), the Delphic undergoes metamorphosis and becomes Odyssean. Thus, I wonder if anything beyond the Delphic is practicable, as much as I might like to set our compass on autopilot. But even expressing meaningful forward guidance along more amorphous lines is challenging. ‘We’ll See’: The point is: Forward guidance can be a complicated monetary policy tool. I had an interesting discussion about this two weeks ago with a couple of the members of the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). They noted that Chris Giles of the Financial Times has devoted a substantial amount of thoughtful attention to the discussion of forward guidance. In Giles’ Money Supply blog post of Oct. 2, 2013, he wrote: “Forget triggers, thresholds, knockouts and long lists of conditions. Paul Fisher, the Bank of England’s head of markets, says everyone is wrong to think forward guidance is complicated. The policy was summarized in a single simple sentence of the [Bank of England’s] explanatory document, he said in a speech today. This is the sentence,” and I’m quoting Giles quoting Paul Fisher: “In essence, the MPC judges that, until the margin of slack within the economy has narrowed significantly, it will be appropriate to maintain the current exceptionally stimulative stance of monetary policy, provided that such an approach remains consistent with its primary objective of price stability and does not endanger financial stability.” To a central banker, that may have seemed about as concise a Delphic statement as possible. But Giles suggested, “I’m sure we can all do better than that.” He took a stab at translating the sentence himself, suggesting that it meant “the MPC will let the recovery run for as long as it can,” but he invited others who might have “better, more elegant and more accurate translations” to submit them via social media. Later that day, he announced the best summation received. Forward guidance expressed in a two-word sentence: “ We’ll see .” [6] That about sums it up. The FOMC is seeking to make sure that we have a sustained recovery without giving rise to inflation or market instability. We will conduct monetary policy accordingly. Regardless of the way we may finally agree at the FOMC to write it out or have Chair Yellen explain it at a press conference, we really cannot say more than that. So that’s where we are: “We’ll see.” Or as Deng Xiaoping would have phrased it: “We will cross the river by feeling the stones” (). We will feel the stones of the economy with the bottoms of our feet as central bankers and proceed accordingly. Draghi’s Old Man At a recent meeting I attended in Frankfurt, Mario Draghi of the European Central Bank told of a man who needed a heart transplant. The doctor leveled with him that he had several choices, including the heart of a 75-year-old central banker. “I’ll take that one,” the man answered immediately. “Why?” the doctor asked. “Well,” said the man, “because it’s never been used.” As was made clear in Chair Yellen’s speech in Chicago earlier this week, central bankers have hearts, and the Fed is working to harness monetary policy to relieve the plight of the cyclically unemployed. But we also need to be vigilant in making clear that we are obligated to maintain price stability and that allowing inflation to take grip is a cardinal sin for a central bank, for it is the cruelest of afflictions for all of society. Joachim Fels of Morgan Stanley noted that Draghi’s little joke serves as a reminder not that my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve belong to a heartless tribe but that “central banking is about making rational, cool-headed and unemotional decisions often under difficult circumstances.” [7] We must conduct monetary policy in a cool-headed and unemotional manner in order to achieve both of the mandates Congress has given us—preserving price stability and achieving full employment—while avoiding financial market turbulence. This is the very best we can offer you, whether you are from ancient Ithaca or Delphi or modern Hong Kong. Those who think we can be more specific in stating our intentions and broadcasting our every next move with complete certainty are, in my opinion, clinging to the myth that economics is a hard science and monetary policy a precise scientific procedure rather than the applied best judgment of cool-headed, unemotional decision-makers. We will cross the river that separates us from a normalized economy and a normalized monetary policy by feeling the stones. We may slip on occasion, but you should not underestimate our intention to apply whatever talents we possess as policymakers to do what is right to advance economic prosperity while strictly adhering to our commitment of containing inflation and maintaining market stability. Thank you. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Robert Shiller’s price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 is based on average inflation-adjusted earnings from the previous 10 years, known as the cyclically adjusted PE ratio. Data on market activity and margin debt can be found at www.nyxdata.com/nysedata/asp/factbook/viewer_interactive.asp . As measured by the Bank of America/Merrill Lynch high-yield corporate debt index covering credits rated BB+ and below. Monty Python is the British comedy troupe known for its satirical skits. A parody about the FOMC’s “dots” could rank up there with the spoof about the argument clinic “intended to create grievous mental confusion among the general public.” A link is provided here for your enjoyment: www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQFKtI6gn9Y . From Churchill by Himself: The Definitive Collection of Quotations , edited by Richard Langworth, Philadelphia: Perseus Books Group, 2008, p. 17. Langworth cites Churchill from March 15, 1926. “Forward guidance in a sentence,” by Chris Giles, Financial Times , Money Supply (blog), Oct. 2, 2013. Giles announced the “forward guidance in a sentence … winner” on Twitter later that same day. Richard Fisher joined Mario Draghi, Mark Carney, Joachim Fels and others at a symposium on “Financial Stability and the Role of Central Banks,” organized by Jens Weidmann and Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt am Main on Feb. 27–28, 2014. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Comments on Tailored Regulation and Forward Guidance Remarks before the Louisiana Bankers Association 114th Annual Convention and Expo May 9, 2014 New Orleans, Louisiana Speech in PDF Thank you, Drake (Mills). Your service as president of the Federal Reserve Board’s Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council is greatly appreciated. You are kind to have a Texan come speak to you and your fellow Louisiana bankers, though this is not without precedent: The great blues guitarist and singer Clarence Garlow may have been born in Louisiana, but he had long lived in Texas before he recorded “Bon Ton Roula” in 1949 and gave New Orleans the reputation of the American city where les bon temps rouler. It would be hard to say that the good times are rolling for community bankers, though the pace and rhythm of the economies of the U.S. and Louisiana and your next-door neighbor, Texas, are getting stronger daily. I have been outspoken as to why our community banks feel besieged. Everyone in this room and their sister or brother knows what I preach about the continuing problem of banks considered “too big to fail” and the witches’ brew that was concocted by Congress, known as Dodd–Frank. My colleagues at the Dallas Fed and I submit that Louisiana’s and the nation’s community and regional banks play on an uneven playing field against the giant money-center banks. The Fed is coming down hard on the big guys to ensure they are adequately capitalized and liquid. We are using all means within our power to make sure they never again place the American taxpayer at risk by bringing the financial system to its knees. But the fact remains that the big banks have a greater share of the deposit market than ever, are coming into our communities and regions to lend money on terms and at prices that any banker with a memory cell knows from experience usually end in tears, and are putting independent bankers in a precarious position. And as to Dodd–Frank, I am skeptical that the bureaucracy and rules and regulations this massive legislative initiative has created, even with the careful execution by the Fed, will vanquish too big to fail—the law’s very intention as stated in its preamble. But of this I am certain: It has made the lives of community and regional banks vastly more complicated. Like almost anything that comes out of the U.S. Congress, it has primarily been a boon to lawyers and consultants and compliance officers, adding to expenses but doing little to help you grow your businesses. We at the Dallas Fed are acutely conscious of this. We think of Dodd–Frank as akin to what Dr. Seuss once wrote about medicine: Interest margins for community and regional banks have been shrinking for some 20 years. To be sure, the low interest rates the Fed has engineered to bring the economy out of the death spiral threatened by the Financial Panic of 2007–09 exacerbated pressures on margins as we awaited the strengthening economy we are now beginning to experience. But adding the pills and the bills of extra layers of compliance and legal expenses generated by Dodd–Frank has compounded the difficulty of passing on profitable franchises to your banking heirs. This is why, Systemwide, the Fed has been sensitive to the situation of banks under $50 billion, and especially sensitive to the situation of banks with less than $10 billion in footings. To be sure, we are as committed as ever to safety and soundness and the application of the law; we always have been and always will be. But at the Dallas Fed, we believe we can apply the requisite discipline required to safeguard our banking system in a way that is beneficial to regional and community banks. We and our fellow Federal Reserve Banks have worked hard to instill a constructive and interactive relationship, rather than a hostile, purely formulaic one, with the banks we supervise. You might have noted that Janet Yellen’s speech of May 1 to the Independent Community Bankers was titled “Tailored Supervision of Community Banks.” The Federal Reserve banks take this charge seriously. This is no idle claim. Just looking at the Eleventh District, we are increasingly being petitioned by banks for membership in the Federal Reserve System. The number of state member banks in the Dallas Fed district increased by 8 percent in 2012, by 19 percent in 2013, and we have already increased membership an annualized 26 percent in the first three months of 2014. So I would just say this to those of you who are madder than (bleep!) about what Congress and the regulators have wrought: The Federal Reserve knows what community and regional banks do for their communities. We appreciate that you are the backbone for the homeowners, small businesses, service clubs and school sports teams and scouts and churches and myriad other activities that make for better communities. We want you not only to endure, but to succeed and grow. And we want to make sure you play on an even playing field with those who have legions of white-shoe lawyers and K Street lobbyists you couldn’t dream of affording. I wanted to just say that at the outset. Monetary Policy Going Forward: De-Spiking the Punch Bowl 10 Ounces at a Time Now, if you will indulge me, I want to speak of the direction of monetary policy from here onward. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is in the process of winding down its massive purchases of Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities. At our last meeting, in recognition that the economy is improving and acknowledging that we have generated massive amounts of excess reserves among depository institutions operating in the U.S., we voted to reduce our purchases to a combined $45 billion per month, on the path to eliminating them at the earliest practicable date. Speaking only for myself as a voting member, barring some destabilizing development in the real economy that comes out of left field, I will continue to vote for the pace of reduction we have undertaken, reducing by $10 billion per meeting our purchases and eliminating them entirely at the October meeting with a final reduction of $15 billion. I was not for this program, popularly known as QE3, to begin with. I doubted its efficacy and was convinced that the financial system already had sufficient liquidity to finance recovery without providing tinder for future inflation. But I lost that argument in the fall of 2012, and I am just happy that we will be rid of the program soon enough. I am often asked why I do not support a more rapid deceleration of our purchases, given my agnosticism about their effectiveness and my concern that they might well be leading to froth in certain segments of the financial markets. The answer is an admission of reality: We juiced the trading and risk markets so extensively that they became somewhat addicted to our accommodation of their needs. You may remember the “taper tantrum” market operators threw last spring when we broached the idea of temperance. It went over about as big as would saying you wanted to ban Hurricanes and other happy-making libations here in New Orleans! Preventing Market Seizures and the DTs Until just recently, Herb Kelleher was chairman of the Dallas Fed board. I can safely say that I had the funniest chairman of any Federal Reserve Bank, and one of the smartest ever. Herb is not only the iconic founder of Southwest Airlines, but he is also an iconic consumer of Wild Turkey Bourbon. A wise man, he advised me that you can’t go from Wild Turkey to cold turkey overnight. So despite having argued against spiking the punchbowl to the degree we did, I have accepted that the prudent course of action and the best way to prevent the onset of market seizures and delirium tremens is to gradually reduce and eventually eliminate the flow of excess liquidity we have been supplying. The financial markets now seem to be unperturbed by and appear to be fully discounting the reduction pattern I am supporting. You should bear in mind that the Fed works directly only with depository institutions. And that they represent only a fifth or less of the credit markets in the U.S. And yet as I speak, depository institutions, including foreign banks doing business in the United States, have $2.5 trillion in excess reserves on the books of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. So one would be hard pressed to say that ending our asset purchases, which the depository institutions from which we buy them deposit back with us as excess reserves, would deny the economy needed liquidity. “Normalizing” Policy The focus of our discussions now is when and how to “normalize” monetary policy. Given that we work directly with only 20 percent or less of the highly developed U.S. credit intermediation system, this becomes a complicated matter. It raises questions, for example, about whether we should focus on the federal funds rate, which has been our traditional fulcrum, or some other measure, such as the rate we pay on excess reserves or that we pay on overnight reverse repos or some mix thereof. You can expect to hear more about this as time passes. Today, I am going to focus on another aspect of “normalization,” and that is: Once we have wound down QE3, when are we likely to raise the short-term rate that anchors the yield curve? In the parlance of the trade, market operators and bankers alike are seeking “forward guidance” about our intentions. I spoke about this at length in a recent speech in Hong Kong, and I refer you to that speech if you need a sleeping aid this evening. [1] The Advent of the Dots The intense focus on when we are likely to raise the overnight rate is understandable. I was a banker in my previous life, before migrating to portfolio management; I spent 20 years in both professions before going into public service so as to “pay it back.” As a banker and market operator, I naturally wanted to eliminate uncertainty as much as possible. The adage “don’t fight the Fed,” was prevalent then, as it is now, so I would garner as much knowledge as possible about future Federal Reserve intentions and moves in order to position my book. Then, we had little information. The FOMC under Paul Volcker did not even announce its decisions, and the market was left to discover them on its own. Later, under Alan Greenspan, the FOMC began the process of releasing information about decisions taken, but any clues as to future intentions required one to divine some signal from the chairman’s almost mystical pronouncements and oracular circumlocution. Chairman Ben Bernanke worked with the FOMC to instill greater transparency under the assumption that providing as much information as we can enlightens markets so as to modulate the possible disruption of surprises and allows decision-makers—from consumers to businesses to bankers and investors—to plan forward. To this end, we now release copious amounts of information, including the forecasts of economic activity and the year-end level at which we see the rate on overnight money trading, as foreseen by each individual FOMC participant under his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. We call this exercise the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP for short. We release it quarterly. I draw your attention to it because it has become something of a phenomenon among analysts preoccupied with the entrails of policymaking and has taken on a life of its own. You read about it in the papers and get analysis of it from market soothsayers. Yet, I want to caution you against becoming overly preoccupied with the FOMC’s SEP. In my less than humble opinion, it is a flawed tool. Let me explain why. Here is what the last SEP release for the fed funds rate looked like. It provided the FOMC participants’ projections for the overnight rate at year-end for the next three years and beyond to the “longer run,” as foreseen from March 19: You can see why it is referred to in the business as “the dot chart.” The best guesses of the entire panoply of participants in FOMC deliberations—19 when we have a full complement (the 12 Fed bankers and the maximum of seven governors appointed by the president subject to approval of the Senate)—are summarized in dots with the expected level on the “y-axis” and the year at the end of which it is thought likely to occur on the “x-axis.” I use the term “best guesses” deliberately. The participants in the FOMC have sophisticated econometric models, a deep knowledge of theory and a great breadth of experience to draw upon. But truth be told, however we dress up our forecasts as rigorous analysis, they are no more than the very best educated guesses of the superbly trained but still human staffs of the 12 Fed bankers and the active governors. And the composition of those among the FOMC participants who actually vote on policy changes periodically. With the departure of Governor Jeremy Stein at the end of this month, we will have eight people, including me, who vote on policy for the remainder of this year. We are hopeful that the full Senate will confirm the two governors who have now come out of the Senate Banking Committee, but we don’t know when that will occur. That will bring the total number of voters to 10. But the composition of those 10 voters will change each year going forward. Here, for example, is how the voters have changed just since last year and how the voting group will morph on into 2016, with those names in red indicating new positions or votes. Dot-ology or Doxology? Even though the Fed has a remarkable assembly of the best economic thinkers on the planet (present company excluded), no one on the FOMC is a seer and none possess Nostradamus-like insight, even when looking out just a couple of quarters; and, given that the roster of those who actually vote on policy is constantly changing, it is a wonder that the analytical community and market economists have become so fixated on “the dots.” Some analysts practically worship the dots. They have become analytical idols around which a doxology of sorts has developed (“Praise dots from whom all insights flow”). Others consider their fallibility but still spill plenty of ink slicing and dicing them. For example, here is a foray into dot-ology sent out on April 23 by the highly regarded chief international economist of Deutsche Bank, Torsten Slok: “One important question is how confident FOMC members are in their forecasts. One way to measure this is to look at the standard deviation around FOMC members’ forecasts of where they think the fed funds rate will be in two years’ time, i.e. look at the standard deviation of the dots in the Fed’s dot chart. … At their latest meeting the FOMC members felt more certain about the coming hike in the fed funds rate than they did a year ago.” [2] I cite Mr. Slok’s analysis only as an example of an entire field of study—a veritable industry—that has evolved around “the dots.” So extensive is the preoccupation with this that it would not surprise me if Harrah’s Casino here on Canal Street eventually starts taking bets on how the dots will shift from quarter to quarter. Surely, economists of high repute are aware of the imperfections of this exercise and the fundamental problem with date-based forward guidance (projecting a schedule for future policy changes). We, on the FOMC, certainly are. Dr. Seuss or Strother Martin? There have been suggestions from outside and within the Fed on how to better present our “best guesses” as to when we will move the base rate for anchoring the yield curve. For example, some have suggested identifying which dots belong to current voting members of the FOMC. Others have suggested that we report only the median of responses or the median of voter responses, rather than the entire array of dots. But neither of these approaches would do anything to enlighten the markets as to the views of future voters, nor would they overcome the underlying problem with date-based forward guidance. What to do? If the dot chart creates confusion, one option would be to dispense with the exercise altogether. Having evoked Dr. Seuss earlier, I can imagine his bidding the dots farewell with some ditty like this: Yet expressing the FOMC participants’ perceptions of, and possible reactions to, an assortment of future scenarios—however often the committee’s composition may change—does strike me as having some merit, if only to give markets insight into how the central bank might react under different circumstances. In the parlance of the trade, this is called “state-based” guidance. Yet here, too, we have struggled. For example, until two meetings ago, we used an unemployment figure of 6½ percent as a point sometime after which we would begin to consider pulling back on monetary accommodation, then decided this wasn’t quite the ticket. This may be a little more inside baseball than you expected to hear today, but here’s the point: Expect the Fed to continue refining its communications. We are getting better at it. But to invoke the immortal words from the chain gang captain portrayed by Strother Martin in the 1967 movie Cool Hand Luke : “What we’ve got here is failure to communicate.” We are working on it so that you and other bankers, market operators, businesses and consumers will develop the best possible insight into how your monetary authority will behave. I expect that our new Chair, Janet Yellen, will play a significant role here as she uses her press conferences to explain what simply cannot be communicated with a series of dots or within the statement we release after each meeting. Alas, There Is Congress Now mind you, your monetary authority—your Federal Reserve—does not hold every card to your future in its hand. No matter how clearly we communicate, no matter how expertly we tailor our supervision of your banks, no matter how we conduct monetary policy, our work is necessary but not sufficient to the success of the Louisiana, Texas and U.S. economies. The fiscal authorities—Congress and the executive branch—must do their job to provide the proper tax, spending and regulatory incentives for businesses to take advantage of the cheap and abundant money the Fed has made possible and put it to work to grow, expand their payrolls and let America truly prosper. I will spare you my thoughts on Congress (it is not very central banker-like to resort to profanity). All I will say is that you and your neighbors and friends and customers are the ones who elect people to office and whether you are a "D" or an "R," you need only look at yourself in the mirror to see who is in charge of placing the right people in office to get the job done of putting the American economy back on track. I’d say you have some serious work to do here. Conclusion For today, just bear in mind that the Fed is doing its utmost to be an enlightened regulator of your banks. For the economy as a whole, there is abundant liquidity to finance economic expansion, and the FOMC will assure that it remains affordable as long as the prospect of inflation rising above its 2 percent target remains in abeyance. It is too early to say that the economy can declare laissez les bon temps rouler . But for you bankers in this audience today, you might be forgiven if you kick up your heels a little bit while you are in New Orleans … though the curmudgeonly old Fed will be watching to make sure that for its part, you don’t let things get out of hand. Thank you, Drake. Thank you all. Now, in the best tradition of central banking, I would be happy to avoid answering any questions you have. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. See “Forward Guidance,” by Richard W. Fisher, remarks before the Asia Society Hong Kong Center, Hong Kong, April 4, 2014, www.dallasfed.org/news/speeches/fisher/2014/fs140404.cfm . “Standard Deviation of the Dots in the Dot Chart,” by Torsten Slok, Deutsche Bank Research, April 23, 2014. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) ‘Never Let Your Brains Go to Your Head’ Commencement Address by Richard W. Fisher: 'Never Let Your Brains Go to Your Head' "My heartfelt advice to you is to work as hard on expanding your EQ as you have on harnessing your IQ." May 17, 2014 Smithfield, R.I. Speech in PDF Before I begin my formal remarks, I want the candidates for degrees to think about the fact that over 5,000 people are here today to celebrate your success. These are your parents and grandparents, cousins, uncles and aunts; your brothers and sisters; your friends; your teachers and coaches and counselors. They have been by your side through joyful moments and less-joyful ones. They have encouraged you. They have believed in you. And they have occasionally badgered and hectored you and … driven you nuts. All to good effect. They are here with glad and happy hearts to celebrate your admission to the society of educated men and women. You will be applauded by them many times today. But I want you, the graduating class, to turn the table on them and give them a round of applause. So stand up, turn around, put your hands together and give them a cheer. Thank them for loving you. Now, please be seated. I also want to salute the outgoing chairman of the Bryant University board of trustees, Michael Edward Fisher, ’67. I want to thank him not only for his six years as chairman and for his total devotion to Bryant, but also for doing his family proud—especially his little brother … me. Blessed to Be Americans Mike Fisher and I grew up in what can most charitably be described as “unusual circumstances.” Our father started out his life in conditions right out of Charles Dickens: At the age of 5 years and 2 months, he was arrested for begging for food and sentenced to seven years in Australia’s harshest prison, a God-awful place called Westbrook Reformatory. [1] He was spared the destiny of most inmates there—he was released quickly and lived to see better days—but to say he grew up rough is an understatement. Our mother, born in a small South African outpost where Norwegians, Swedes and Danes carved a life out of the “bush,” lost her father at the age of 4 and was raised by a single mom who cooked for a boarding house. Neither of our parents had a formal education. But both were smart and ambitious for a better life. What did they do? They came to America. It was here that their family flourished. If you are ever tempted to doubt what hardworking immigrants bring to our shores and the power and moral imperative of a free economy or American-style democracy, think twice. Only in America could two sons of a once-homeless beggar and the daughter of a boarding-house cook become what you see here on this stage today: One the distinguished chairman of the board of trustees of Bryant University, and the other a policymaker for the most important central bank in the world who is somehow deemed worthy of receiving an honorary doctorate and being chosen as speaker for the 151st commencement of this fine university. We are blessed to be Americans. The Sages of the Ages Now, the only thing that stands between you and receiving your Bryant degree is … me. I will speak quickly and take up just a few moments of your time before you celebrate your accomplishments. By now, you have taken enough writing courses to know the tongue-in-cheek definition of a good essay: It is a collection of other people’s thoughts disguised as your own! [2] Most graduation speeches are no different. The standard routine for a commencement speaker is to dig through Bartlett’s or the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations or resort to Google and Wikiquote to find something said by some sage that will grace a graduation ceremony with a lesson students can take with them as they go off into this mysterious and challenging world. To find something profound that I might pinch for your amusement today, I pored over the sayings of the great minds through time: Plato, Socrates, Mencius, Muhammad, St. Paul and St. Augustine, Voltaire, Martin Luther, Mother Teresa … Miley Cyrus, Justin Bieber. The maxims put forward by the sages of the ages are inspiring, but you already know them or you would not be where you are today: Be disciplined; be prepared; be loyal and thrifty and brave; always question conventional wisdom; take risks; push the envelope; be true to yourself; never promise more than you can deliver; never compromise your integrity; don’t waste your talents; never forget that you have been given those talents in order to do good; never, ever, ever, ever give up the pursuit of excellence. These are all wise maxims. But, truth be told, it would save time and expedite many a graduation ceremony if organizers would forgo a commencement speaker and simply remind the graduating class to read and, throughout life, reread the Old and New Testament or the Quran or Confucius or Shakespeare—the ultimate sources of almost every graduation speech I have ever read or listened to. For example, it would tax the capacity of the most powerful search engine to pull up the countless commencement speakers who have lifted and adapted variations of Shakespeare’s lines in King Henry VI , Part 2, Act 4, Scene VII that “ignorance is the curse of God, [k]nowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven.” Diana Sorensen’s Dictum One of the most intriguing living thinkers, Diana Sorensen, the dean of arts and humanities at Harvard University, defines a knowledgeable graduate taking wing as follows: “He or she is competent in making discerning judgments with tools derived from science, engineering, social science, the arts and humanities. He or she should be a persuasive speaker who can articulate the reasons for his positions; who can write with clarity, elegance and conceptual power; an innovator who will take risks but first makes sure the limb they go out on is a sturdy one; a creative individual who has faced challenges posed by artistic production and experimentation; a global citizen who can speak, read, write in at least a second language; and who will learn what it takes to negotiate different world views emanating from different cultural traditions, a tolerant yet rigorous thinker whose moral compass is guided by ethical reasoning.” [3] Class of 2014, I don’t want to put any pressure on you! But that pretty much summarizes the skill set we all hope you have started to acquire at Bryant and will now go on to hone in life. Babe Fisher and John Paul Jones Preparing to speak to you today, I asked: How might I, a central banker whose musings are given to the arcana of economic and monetary policy, possibly improve upon the wisdom of the ultimate sources? Not easily. So I dug deep into my memory bank and called upon a source more erudite than the lessons of the Bible or the Quran, Confucius or Shakespeare, and even more insightful than Diana Sorensen—Mike’s and my mother, Magnhild Andersen Fisher, whom everybody called “Babe.” Babe Fisher never enjoyed the benefit of the type of education you have received. Yet she was a wise woman. She was a kind of female Nordic Yogi Berra who dispensed exquisite pearls of wisdom to her boys. One is especially germane for this ceremony. Our mother would say: “Never let your brains go to your head.” The pun is horrific but the message is profound: To achieve success, you will need to keep your superb education and your considerable talent in perspective. Brains and the gift of talent are necessary, but they are insufficient for success in life. Time and again, in business and universities and government we see instances in which women and men of towering intellect get far at first but ultimately snatch defeat from the jaws of victory. They do so because they have forgotten to develop their emotional quotient with the same devotion they applied to developing their intelligence quotient. My heartfelt advice to you is to work as hard on expanding your EQ as you have on harnessing your IQ. You all have great futures ahead of you. You will get there just as fast, and enjoy it much more, if you remember that a sound mind resides most comfortably in a sound, well-rounded person and that a sound, well-rounded person has more than a superior education and brain. The whole person is as important an achievement for those few who have been admitted to the “society of educated men and women” as is the achievement of intellectual excellence. As a former midshipman, I have always been inspired by the creed of the father of the Navy, John Paul Jones, as written by his biographer Augustus Buell. “It is by no means enough that an officer of the Navy should be a capable mariner. He must be that, of course, but also a great deal more. He should be as well a gentleman of liberal education, refined manners, punctilious courtesy, and the nicest sense of personal honor. He should be the soul of tact, patience, justice, firmness, and charity. … Every commander should keep constantly before him the great truth, that to be well obeyed, he must be perfectly esteemed.” I would say that Jones (or Buell) nailed it. Take the naval reference and the gender bias out, and you have the ultimate guide for all of you who depart Bryant today aspiring to lead: You must be more than smart and have more than a mighty intellect; you must develop the whole woman, the whole man to be a leader in whatever field you chose. A Smattering of Latin Which brings me to the last requirement for most all commencement orations—a smattering of Latin. Commencement speakers at great schools seem to delight in showing off their command of an ancient tongue. Many a commencement speaker might have concluded this afternoon’s remarks with labor omnia vincit —a stern reminder that labor conquers all things. It is true, indeed, that you can’t rest on your laurels or your good family name or a Bryant education or just plain good luck. You have to work hard and sweat to succeed. And in doing so, you have to remember mens sana in corpore sano —a sound mind resides best in a sound body. But that is way too ponderous. This is, after all, a festive day! So I will conclude with this: “ Bubbus, sed possum explicarle, non sed possum comprehendere. ” For those of you unschooled in the language of the ancient Romans, that is Texas-ized, distorted Latin for “Bubba, I can explain it to you, but I can’t understand it for you.” This afternoon I have done my best to explain to the Class of 2014 that success comes to those who best put their talents in context and who connect their substantial intellectual achievement to an equally developed emotional capacity. Those of us who lead cerebral lives must constantly strive to elevate our people skills to a level equal to our intellectual skills. I can explain that to you ad nauseam (aha! Another Latin phrase!). But you must come to understand it on your own. And if you do—if you go through your promising lives remembering that the “whole person is the best person”—my guess is that someday one of you in the Class of 2014 will be standing at this very podium giving the commencement speech to some future generation of graduates and their thousands of supporters and admirers. And having the greatest pleasure a speaker can have: Quoting your very own mom. Congratulations, God bless you and good luck! Thank you. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Westbrook: Surviving Australia’s Most Sadistic Reformatory , by William Stokes, Sydney, Australia: Macmillan by Pan Macmillan Australia, 2010. If memory serves from my days at Oxford University, this observation was noted by Graham Chapman, one of the stalwarts of Monty Python’s Flying Circus . Dean Sorensen’s comments are summarized in “Coming Back, Looking Forward,” Harvard Gazette, Sept. 26, 2012. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.
