The economic effects of the coronavirus have caused great hardship and created enormous uncertainty. The root of this downturn—a global pandemic—means this is a completely different kind of recession compared to anything we've experienced in the past. As the pandemic unfolds, many people are starting to ask questions about our economic future: What will the recovery look like? When will it begin? And how will it be affected by the virus? It's easiest to start with the last of these questions first. The virus will continue to be at center stage throughout the economic recovery. We are traveling down a narrow path, balancing a return of economic activity with effective containment of COVID-19. The overall unemployment rate reached nearly 15 percent in April, and around 20 million Americans have lost their jobs—numbers I hoped I would never see in my lifetime. These figures understate the full extent of the pandemic's toll on the economy. The pandemic and the ensuing economic downturn have done disproportionate harm to communities of color. Black and Hispanic families, as well as lower-wage workers, have suffered the most. 2 Those who least can afford it have been hardest hit, making a strong and full economic recovery of paramount importance. As the recent surge in cases in some states demonstrates, much is still unknown about how the pandemic will play out in the months ahead. That said, there have been signs that we may be past the worst of the extreme economic distress, and early indications of a recovery have started to emerge. As states began to open up and people returned to eating in restaurants and shopping in stores we've seen sizable increases in consumer spending. We've also seen increases in building permits, signaling a turnaround in the construction industry. 3 People have been getting back to work and the unemployment rate has started to edge down. Although this improvement is welcome, the economy is still far from healthy and a full recovery will likely take years to achieve. One of the things that's been unique about this recession is the lightning speed of events. Traditional macroeconomic data sources—like the labor market report and GDP—are published with lags of weeks or months and don't typically allow one to see the changes within the month or quarter. In response, economists at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere have increasingly turned to analyzing a wide variety of high-frequency data, which—as the name suggests—are published daily or weekly, with only short reporting lags. 4 High-frequency data give us more timely and granular information about what's going on in the economy in between the standard macro data releases. They also help us paint a more detailed picture of people's behavior and how it's changing in the midst of unprecedented circumstances. These data tell us whether small businesses are hiring and whether people are eating in restaurants, staying in hotels, and boarding airplanes. When states started to reopen, signs from both the standard macro data and the high-frequency granular data have been encouraging. Together, they indicate that we've likely seen the low point of the downturn and that the overall economy has begun to recover. Even in New York, the hardest hit state, we have seen initial signs of a turnaround. Surveys of manufacturing and services firms rebounded significantly in June, following record lows in April and May, and revenues of small businesses in New York have gradually picked up as well. 5 In contrast to these positive signs, we are seeing some indications of a slowing in the pace of recovery in states that are currently experiencing large-scale outbreaks. This is a valuable reminder that the economy's fate is inextricably linked to the path of the virus. A strong economic recovery depends on effective and sustained containment of COVID-19. Turning to the question of what the goals for recovery are: one measure of success is a return to the sustained growth and historically low unemployment that we had attained before the pandemic. I know this seems a long way from where we are today and may seem unreachable during these darkest days of the recession. But history teaches us that the economy can get back to full strength, even after deep downturns. Policy Responses The unique nature of this recession and the uncertainty that comes with it mean that the policy responses—public health, fiscal, and by the Fed—need to be designed to reflect the nature of the pandemic and the challenges it poses to the economy. Although I will focus on events in the United States, it is important to stress that this is a global health and economic crisis. Most other countries are facing similar challenges and are likewise engaged in a range of policy actions. Our economic prospects are tied to our ability to contain the spread of the virus, care for those who fall ill, and develop effective treatments. In addition, fiscal policy has played a critically important role in providing financial support to families, small businesses, and those who are out of work during the crisis. This timely support contributed greatly to the rebound in consumer spending and jobs that we have seen over the past two months. The Federal Reserve has taken rapid and significant actions to stabilize critical parts of our financial system and to support the flow of credit, thereby helping position the economy for a strong and sustained return to maximum employment and price stability. In March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) brought the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero. 6 The FOMC has indicated that it expects to keep interest rates at this level until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. 7 Bringing interest rates down to near zero makes it easier for households and businesses to meet their borrowing needs and fosters favorable financial conditions that will help promote a rebound in spending and investment. In addition, the Fed has been conducting large-scale repo operations and purchasing sizable quantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support market functioning at a time of extraordinary volatility in markets. 8 These actions averted a potential shutdown in the availability of credit, which would have made the current economic crisis even more severe. Although functioning in financial markets has improved since March, the Federal Reserve has indicated that it will continue to increase asset holdings to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. 9 In addition to stabilizing financial markets, the Federal Reserve has instituted a number of programs to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. These actions will enable them to continue to do their work, both now and when normal life resumes. 10 Taken together, these programs have helped restore the functioning of financial markets, foster favorable financial conditions, and support the continued flow of credit to businesses and households. Conclusion I'll conclude with this: This pandemic and this recession form a pivotal moment for the Federal Reserve. We are seeing signs that the economy has started to recover. Still, the economic outlook remains highly uncertain and it's going to take considerable time to restore the economy to its full potential. But rest assured, we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and bring about a full and robust recovery. 1 COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University, accessed June 29, 2020. 2 The impact on lower-wage workers is analyzed in Cajner, Tomaz, L.D. Crane, R. A. Decker, J. Grigsby, A. Hamins-Puertolas, E. Hurst, C. Kurz, and A Yildirmaz., 2020. " The U.S. Labor Market During the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession ." Becker Friedman Institute, University of Chicago, Working Paper, No. 2020-58 (June). 3 U.S. Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development, Monthly New Residential Construction, May 2020 , June 17, 2020. 4 An example at the New York Fed is the bi-weekly publication of the Weekly Economic Index . 5 Empire State Manufacturing Survey , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 2020; Business Leaders Survey , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 2020. The data on small business revenue come from Womply, a software-as-a-service provider focused on customer relationship management. 6 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 3, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020. 7 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , April 29, 2020; See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , June 10, 2020. 8 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020. 9 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , June 10, 2020. 10 For announcements of the various programs, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to Support the Credit Needs of Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Broadens Program of Support for the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses by Establishing a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) , March 18, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Will Establish a Facility to Facilitate Lending to Small Businesses via the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) By Providing Term Financing Backed by PPP Loans , April 6, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans to Support the Economy , April 9, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

The Fed’s Emergency Facilities: Usage, Impact, and Early Lessons - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech The Fed’s Emergency Facilities: Usage, Impact, and Early Lessons July 08, 2020 Daleep Singh , Executive Vice President Remarks at Hudson Valley Pattern for Progress (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Introduction Good morning, everyone. Thanks to Jonathan Drapkin and the Hudson Valley Pattern for Progress for inviting me to speak today, and to all of you for being here. During his regional visit last July, New York Fed President John Williams heard from you and others in the area about several key issues—including workforce development, changing demographics, concerns about equitable growth, and a lack of affordable housing and public transportation. I have no doubt all of these issues have become far more acute—while many deeper ones have arisen—because of the tremendous hardship caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Now more than ever, dialogues such as this one provide insight into the extraordinary challenges faced by the communities we serve. 1 With this context in mind, I will briefly review the actions the Federal Reserve has taken to support the U.S. economy in the face of the pandemic, focusing in particular on the facilities that were created under the Federal Reserve’s emergency lending authority. I’ll then explain the effectiveness of these facilities and offer some early lessons learned, and will end by highlighting some challenges and opportunities as we look ahead. I’d like to emphasize that while many of the tools at our disposal work through financial markets and institutions, the end goal is to achieve maximum employment and stable prices, and you will also hear about new lengths the Federal Reserve has gone to support an inclusive recovery. I should also make it clear that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The Fed’s Unprecedented Actions As part of a comprehensive government response to the economic distress and profound uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve has taken unprecedented actions in pursuit of its dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. Chair Powell recently bucketed the Fed’s actions across four areas: open market operations to restore market functioning; actions to improve liquidity conditions in short-term funding markets; programs launched in coordination with the Treasury Department to facilitate the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments; and measures to encourage banks to use their substantial capital and liquidity buffers to support the economy during this time of hardship. 2 The Federal Reserve has also made a number of regulatory adjustments to help address the crisis. 3 While the Federal Reserve has faced many crises in the past, what has distinguished the current situation is both the speed and scale of the economic and market deterioration brought on by the virus—as well as the speed and scale of the response. Over about a three-week period in March and April, the Fed ramped up its use of existing tools to a historic degree and, in coordination with the Treasury Department, invoked its emergency lending authority to launch nine new facilities to support a broad cross section of the economy, all with the intent of supporting economic activity and employment. 4 At the same time, robust fiscal support has provided direct relief to those suffering the consequences of the virus. Policymakers have made forceful commitments to these facilities, which have a combined capacity of more than $2.6 trillion, easily several times larger than peak facility usage in the Global Financial Crisis. 5 Although the challenges of 2008-09 were different from the current shock, that experience left us with blueprints for tools that might be used again, and encouraged us to act creatively in deploying new tools better suited to the current circumstances. In doing so, the Federal Reserve sought to prevent the immense pandemic-induced declines in economic activity from morphing into a full-fledged financial crisis, or producing lasting scars for households and businesses. Usage of the Facilities Four months in, all of the emergency credit and liquidity facilities are operational, and we can take stock of how the programs are being used and the impact they’re having. The bottom line is that the impact of the facilities has been large and sustained, while the usage has been generally low. Figure 1 shows the outstanding balance of loans or asset purchases for each facility as of July 1, and peak outstanding balances since each program was launched. These peaks are well below those seen for similar programs deployed during the Global Financial Crisis. The limited usage to date compared to the 2008-09 crisis can be explained in part by the fact that the core of the financial system was in much better condition entering into the current episode—banks themselves were well capitalized, for example. Because the crisis did not originate in the financial sector, markets were able to recover faster from the initial shock and have been highly responsive to the combined fiscal and monetary policy measures. For their part, the backstops established by the emergency facilities have proved especially powerful in restoring confidence for private sector borrowing and lending to resume, which in turn helps the flow of credit to the economy. This resilience of financial markets is consistent with the trends seen in Figure 2 , showing how facility usage has evolved over time. The first facilities to start operations were the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), Money Market Liquidity Facility (MMLF), and Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF)—the light blue, dark blue, and red areas, respectively. These programs sought to repair short-term wholesale funding markets, which serve as the lifeblood of functioning markets. As those markets recovered with overarching support from the Fed’s actions, usage of the PDCF and MMLF has declined. Similarly, with an easing of pressures in commercial paper markets soon after the CPFF’s announcement, this facility too has seen only limited take-up. This pattern reflects the “lender of last resort” design of these programs: they provide a relief valve if market strains re-intensify, but are not expected to be used heavily under less stressful conditions. The main source of growth in outstanding balances comes from the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF)—shown by the dark gray area. This program bolsters the effectiveness of the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program by supplying liquidity to bank and nonbank financial institutions that originate PPP loans. Since its launch in mid-April, PPPLF usage has risen steadily, and outstanding advances are about $70 billion. This amount is still well below the program’s potential take-up, which is equal to the amount of PPP loans extended, currently over $500 billion. Nonetheless, we have heard from PPP lenders that the program bolsters their confidence in making PPP loans to small businesses, as every PPP lender is eligible to use the PPPLF. Well over 600 PPP lenders are currently using the facility across all 12 Reserve Banks. We have seen modest starts to several other facilities that recently launched and stand ready to support critical segments of the economy. The gold area is the Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF), which funded $1.2 billion of 12-month notes for the State of Illinois to assist with COVID-19 related cash flow pressures. Not visible is the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), which is designed to improve lending conditions for a range of consumer, small business, and commercial loans. TALF launched last month and has lent about $250 million to date. Additionally, lending facilities are now available to help businesses maintain operations and keep employees in their jobs. The Main Street Lending Program (MSLP), which provides loans to small and medium-sized entities, including nonprofits, and the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF), which provides bridge financing to large investment-grade corporate employers if they cannot secure adequate credit elsewhere, both recently opened. More sizable, the pink sliver shows balances of corporate debt the Fed has purchased through its Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF), about $10 billion so far. Unlike the other facilities, which establish standing windows for eligible borrowers, 6 the Fed sets the pace of corporate debt purchases based on market conditions. 7 Since the SMCCF’s launch, as market functioning has improved, we have slowed the pace of purchases, from about $300 million per day to a bit under $200 million a day. 8 If market conditions continue to improve, Fed purchases could slow further, potentially reaching very low levels or stopping entirely. This would not be a signal that the SMCCF’s doors were closed, but rather that markets are functioning well. Should conditions deteriorate, purchases would increase. 9 Impact of the Facilities To reiterate the key point from earlier, despite low usage of the facilities, their impact has been large and sustained. In terms of liquidity and funding conditions, we’ve seen a dramatic recovery since mid-March, as seen in Figure 3 . This improvement likely comes from a full array of policy actions deployed in quick succession—not only the facilities I just described, but also the lowering of the Fed’s policy rate to effectively zero, expanded repos and purchases of Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities, more generous terms for discount window borrowing, and an expansion in the availability of cross-border liquidity. In terms of credit conditions, as seen in Figure 4 , we’ve also seen a sharp reduction of credit spreads that has broadened over time from investment grade debt, to high yield, to municipal bonds, and asset-backed securities, and this has triggered a surge of issuance across asset classes as borrowing rates have normalized. While there are still pockets of strain in some markets, and in sectors where business models are directly challenged by the virus, even in these areas there are tentative signs of healing. Early Lessons Learned Of course, there are limits on what the central bank can do, and only time will tell the ultimate impact of the facilities on supporting the Fed’s dual-mandate objectives, but I would attribute much of the facilities’ initial success to four main factors: their size and scope, coordination across the government, flexibility, and sustainability. First, the size and scope of the facilities have demonstrated the Fed’s capacity and resolve to blunt the initial economic effects of the pandemic shock. As I mentioned earlier, the potential lending capacity of the facilities is unparalleled. And critically, this lending capacity is being channeled to support a broad cross section of the financial markets and economy—supporting the availability of credit for households, helping small and medium-sized businesses maintain their payroll and employees through new and expanded loans, providing credit to large employers so they are able to pay suppliers and maintain their business operations, and supporting state and local governments experiencing cash flow pressures. Second, the facilities represent a full partnership with the Treasury Department, signaling a government-wide effort to cushion the U.S. economy from the shocks caused by the pandemic. The Treasury Secretary approved the Fed’s use of emergency lending authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to establish the programs, and the Treasury has provided equity investments in many of them, thus absorbing some of the risk of the Fed’s involvement in private credit markets. The close alignment of the Fed and Treasury served as a “force multiplier” in transmitting stimulus, especially at a time when investors, businesses, and the public at large were looking for signs of a coordinated government response. Third, the facilities are flexible. Term sheets for each facility have been updated or amended since they were first announced, demonstrating a willingness to adapt program design in response to feedback and changing conditions, and to make the facilities more accessible and inclusive. 10 As Fed policymakers have made clear, these programs can be ramped up or refined further as needed, depending on the impact of and lessons learned from the initial rollout. 11 Lastly, a key success factor has been the sustainability of the facilities. Although the Federal Reserve has moved to implement the facilities at maximum speed, we’ve also done so with maximum care. This means our efforts to launch and operate the facilities are guided by a set of principles that we believe will sustain the public’s trust and confidence in our actions. Transparency, inclusive access, good governance, and accountability are at the forefront of our work to implement the facilities, and I’d like to expand upon each of these principles. 12 , 13 Transparency Transparency is fundamental to our credibility, knowing that the Federal Reserve, together with the Treasury, has been entrusted to deploy large sums of public resources. In practice, this requires that we make clear in our term sheets and public FAQs who is eligible to participate in the facilities as a borrower, seller, or intermediary. It means timely reporting on who is using the facility, including and going beyond what is required by law. 14 It also means making public all vendor contracts, including details on the fee structure and key terms of service arrangements. Access In our effort to contain the damage from the virus shock, the Federal Reserve retained several outside vendors to accelerate the facilities’ rollout and to supplement our areas of internal expertise. 15 Our initial vendor selections prioritized expertise, scale, and in many cases, the ability to segregate a team of dedicated personnel. We also relied in many cases on existing relationships with primary dealers as financial intermediaries to get up and running quickly. This approach helped to launch our facilities at maximum speed, but our strategy from the start has been to diversify our vendor and counterparty base in the post-launch phase. All of the contracts the New York Fed has signed are short term; each has a provision to cancel with 30 days’ notice. Given this flexibility, we are evaluating all contracts after 90 days, with priority on re-bidding those that were not competitively bid. We’re also actively exploring opportunities to diversify the range of potential vendors and counterparties we work with across facility activities. Governance and Accountability Finally, in pursuing our policy goals, we have an obligation to the public to be accountable for all our actions. We have embedded the facilities into Reserve Bank risk management and control frameworks, while building new layers of governance as added layers of protection. We also remain ready to engage with our oversight bodies and those appointed under the CARES Act to ensure that the American people understand the steps we are taking on their behalf as faithful stewards of the public trust. Challenges and Opportunities In my remaining time, I’ll mention a few of the ongoing challenges and opportunities as we look ahead. First, as President Williams said just last week, the virus has hit the most vulnerable segments of our society the hardest. 16 Communities of color and lower-wage workers are facing higher rates of unemployment, limited access to healthcare, and greater exposure to the virus. We need to stay focused on the distributional effects of our actions and challenge ourselves to promote a more equitable recovery, while also understanding the limits of what our monetary policy and lending powers can directly achieve. Second, while we can be confident that low facility usage amid generally well-functioning markets reflects the power of backstops, we must remain vigilant for any signs of hesitation of eligible participants to use the facilities out of concerns it sends a signal of weakness. Credible backstops provide confidence that may prevent a severe deterioration of market conditions going forward, but the true test of the facilities’ effectiveness will be if they are used when needed in dysfunctional market conditions. As always, we stand ready to make adjustments to our operations as necessary to meet our objectives. Third, what does the intensity of market distress and abrupt deleveraging in mid-March tell us about vulnerabilities that were building in the nonbanking sector for many years, particularly for business models that are structured with large amounts of embedded leverage, and those still reliant on short-term wholesale funding? And finally, while we entered this crisis with well-capitalized banks, we need to be watchful of banking sector resilience in the face of potential waves of nonperforming loans and bankruptcies that could challenge asset quality. All of this is to remind us of what we already know: there remains tremendous uncertainty about the path ahead, and so we must stay humble in the face of ongoing risks and resolute in our commitment to adapt as needed. I’ll conclude by expressing my deep personal gratitude to the health care professionals and essential workers who put themselves at risk each day to meet the basic needs of others, and to my colleagues at the Federal Reserve, who continue to work tirelessly to help safeguard our economy and financial system. I’m humbled and inspired by their service. Figures 1 I’m grateful to Deborah Leonard and Julie Lasson for their assistance in preparing these remarks, to Shafat Alam, Shawn Nee, and David Tam for their assistance with data and charts, and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for valuable comments and suggestions. 2 Chair Jerome H. Powell, Coronavirus and CARES Act , testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2020. 3 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19 , accessed July 7, 2020. 4 The facilities established under the authority of Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary follow: Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) and Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), established March 17; Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), established March 18; Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF), Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF), and Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), established March 23; and Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF), Main Street Lending Program (MSLP), and Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF), established April 9. 5 Chair Jerome H. Powell, Coronavirus and CARES Act , testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. May 19, 2020. 6 Subject to specified limits. 7 The facility’s purchases recently shifted from ETFs to cash bonds, which will likely be its primary tool in the current market environment. If market conditions deteriorate, both ETFs and cash bonds will be purchased. 8 For context, $300 million of ETFs purchases a day represented about 10 percent of average daily volumes for ETFs that were eligible for purchase at the time. Purchases are currently a bit under $200 million a day across ETFs and cash bonds, around 5 percent of the average daily volume of eligible cash bonds, and less than 1 percent of ETF average daily volume. 9 Indeed, the Fed stands ready to ramp up any of the tools mentioned if conditions worsen. 10 The MLF, for example, broadened the program’s eligibility parameters so that smaller cities and counties could qualify to participate, expanding the set of potential eligible issuers from around 75 in the program’s original terms to nearly 400 now. The term of the notes eligible for sale to the facility was also lengthened to 36 months, and the active life of the program was extended to December 31, 2020. Among other changes, the Main Street Lending Program expanded participation to include nonprofit organizations, which are playing a crucial role supporting people during the pandemic. The PPPLF expanded eligibility to include the participation of nonbanks and the acceptance of loans purchased from the originator. 11 Chair Jerome H. Powell, Coronavirus and CARES Act , testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., June 30, 2020. 12 Michael Held, The Federal Reserve’s Pandemic Response , remarks at Union of Arab Banks Webinar: Global Banking in Light of COVID-19 and Geopolitical Development, June 25, 2020. 13 Daleep Singh, Implementing the Fed’s Facilities: Moving at Maximum Speed with Maximum Care , remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, April 17, 2020. 14 On a weekly basis, the Federal Reserve Board’s H.4.1 statistical release reports on aggregate balances of each of the facilities and where relevant, provides additional information about their net portfolio holdings. Every 30 days, the Board reports to Congress the outstanding balance of each facility, the value of the collateral posted, the amount of interest, fees, and other revenue or items of value received in exchange for the assistance, and any expected taxpayer losses for such assistance. The CCFs, MLF, TALF, PPPLF, and MSLP include transaction-specific information, including the identity of the participant, the amount, relevant price, and related security information. Additionally, the New York Fed recently published the first monthly snapshot of the components and weights of the SMCCF’s eligible index. 15 For example, while the Fed has over a decade of experience in asset purchases, it had never before made purchases of corporate debt. 16 John C. Williams, A Different Kind of Recession , remarks at the Institute of International Finance: Central Banking in the Age of COVID-19 Summit, June 30, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

July 13, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at LIBOR: Entering the Endgame (a webinar hosted by the Bank of England and the New York Fed) As prepared for delivery It's a great pleasure to be sharing a platform with Andrew Bailey to discuss the transition away from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), a topic of critical importance to the safety and soundness of the financial system. The ongoing transition away from LIBOR has ramifications for institutions, markets, and regulators across the globe, making cooperation at the international level of critical importance. The last time Andrew and I spoke together on this topic was almost exactly a year ago, when the world was a very different place. 1 In the intervening months, we've experienced a devastating pandemic that has caused hardship across the world, and has led to the worst recession in living memory here in the U.S. Since the advent of the pandemic, this is the first speech I've given on a topic other than the economic outlook and monetary policy. Despite the array of challenges we're facing as a result of the coronavirus, transitioning away from LIBOR continues to be of paramount importance. Today, I'm going to talk about what the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) and others have achieved in the face of enormous adversity and what still needs to be done between now and the end of next year. But before I continue, let me give the usual disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. A Challenging Year With a pandemic that's touched every aspect of our way of life, it's easy to forget why transitioning away from LIBOR is so important. It's 13 years since the LIBOR scandal first hit the headlines, and it's still an unreliable reference rate. LIBOR submissions from banks are largely based on judgment, rather than real numbers, making the rate vulnerable to manipulation and fraud, and bringing increased risk with its use in financial contracts. 2 In fact, this problem became even more acute this spring during the period of severe market stress, when term lending transactions based on LIBOR became even more scarce than usual. Thus, the urgency to switch to more robust reference rates and deal with legacy contracts has not gone away; if anything, this issue has become more pressing. Unsurprisingly, the pandemic has caused some reprioritization of work streams as the official sector and market participants adjusted to social distancing restrictions and worked to keep their employees safe. But the importance of transitioning from LIBOR is so great that despite the effects of COVID-19, the overall timeline remains the same: There are now 537 days until the existence of LIBOR can no longer be assured. The clock is still ticking, and it's critical that regulators and institutions continue to work together to ensure we are all ready for January 1, 2022. What We've Achieved Even with the unprecedented situation of a global pandemic, I'm encouraged that a huge amount of progress has been made on the LIBOR transition since the last time Andrew and I spoke. Far from slowing down, the pace of progress has accelerated. In the United States, there have been numerous consultations issued, a raft of recommendations published, and a variety of new tools developed, all to support the transition to more robust reference rates. These include a consultation on the recommended spread adjustment methodology for cash products transitioning to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), the publication of recommended fallback language for adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) and student loans, as well as checklists to help different types of institutions navigate the transition. There has also been a great deal of interest in the possibility of SOFR-linked Treasury securities, and the U.S. Treasury recently asked for comments on such a concept. The consultation closed last week, and I hope many of the institutions present today shared their views. 3 Another significant milestone is that in March, the New York Fed started the publication of SOFR averages and a SOFR index. The New York Fed now publishes three compound averages of SOFR daily, which are less variable than daily rates and may be useful for some applications. 4 SOFR is based on a much higher volume of underlying transactions than LIBOR, making it more representative of market conditions and less vulnerable to manipulation. It's also the rate selected by the ARRC as its preferred replacement for USD LIBOR. If the pandemic has confirmed one thing about financial benchmarks, it's the resilience of robust reference rates, including SOFR. On a backdrop of enormous turmoil and uncertainty, both in financial markets and the broader economy, SOFR was a dog that didn't bark (or bite). The New York Fed publishes a number of overnight secured and unsecured funding rates, and during this tumultuous period, they all moved in concert, anchored by the rates set by the Federal Reserve. This success may not have attracted headlines, but it demonstrates the value of robust reference rates that are a fair representation of the underlying market. In addition in March, the ARRC proposed draft legislation in New York to deal with legacy contracts—a particularly challenging issue. 5 And finally, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will stop accepting ARMs based on LIBOR by the end of 2020. And they plan to begin accepting ARMs based on SOFR later this year. 6 Yes, it's fair to say that a huge amount of progress has been made in many directions over the past 12 months. It's encouraging that even in the face of a global pandemic, neither the official sector, nor the industry, has lost forward momentum. Next Steps But we cannot afford to be complacent. With just 537 days left, there's still much to accomplish. This year the ARRC reiterated its commitment to support the industry through the remainder of the transition. In April, the ARRC published its 2020 objectives, which laid out a number of important milestones that need to be achieved. 7 Key areas of focus include work to address the challenges associated with legacy contracts, the development of a forward-looking SOFR rate, and finalizing the ARRC-recommended spread adjustment for legacy contracts transitioning to SOFR. In May, the ARRC followed up with the publication of recommended best practices for market participants. 8 This included timelines for a variety of products, including floating-rate notes, business and consumer loans, securitizations, and derivatives. It's critical that market participants meet the milestones set out in the best practices and have a clear understanding of any outstanding exposure they have to LIBOR. There are checklists and implementation guides available for institutions working to adopt SOFR, 9 and market participants are encouraged to adhere to the ISDA protocol on a timely basis following its publication. It doesn't matter whether you're a large global bank or a local company with a handful of employees, you need to be prepared to manage your institution's transition away from LIBOR. I hope it goes without saying that new use of USD LIBOR in financial contracts should stop. As I've said before, let's not make the existing hole we're trying to climb out of even deeper. 10 Conclusion I'll conclude with this: Transitioning away from LIBOR to more robust reference rates is a huge and complex undertaking. It involves numerous jurisdictions, multiple types of institutions, and a raft of financial products. Since July last year, the ARRC, the official sector, and market participants have all made remarkable progress in the most challenging of circumstances to prepare themselves for the end of LIBOR. The ongoing commitment and the forward momentum are welcome, positive signs. As we mark days off the calendar, let's all make sure we use the remaining time wisely and effectively. 1 John C. Williams, 901 Days , Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York (July 15, 2019). 2 See Bank of England, Interim Financial Stability Report , May 2020, p. 13, Box 1. 3 Treasury Department, Development and Potential Issuance of Treasury Floating Rate Notes Indexed to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate , 85 Fed. Reg. 31282 (May 22, 2020). 4 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Transition from LIBOR . 5 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Proposed Legislative Solution to Minimize Legal Uncertainty and Adverse Economic Impact Associated with LIBOR Transition , March 6, 2020. 6 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, LIBOR Transition FAQs . 7 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, 2020 Objectives . 8 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Best Practices for Completing Transition from LIBOR . 9 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Practical Implementation Checklist for SOFR Adoption , September 2019. 10 John C. Williams, 901 Days , Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York (July 15, 2019). Related Content 901 Days Remarks by John C. Williams at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), July 15, 2019 LIBOR: The Clock Is Ticking Remarks by John C. Williams at the 2019 U.S. Treasury Market Conference, September 23, 2019 Alternative Reference Rates Committee A group of private-market participants convened by the Federal Reserve Board and the New York Fed to help ensure a successful transition from USD LIBOR to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), its recommended alternative. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

July 16, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 16th Meeting of the Financial Research Advisory Committee for the Treasury’s Office of Financial Research (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Good morning. Over the past four months we have experienced a series of unprecedented events. The pandemic, social distancing, and the economic fallout have transformed all of our lives. This summer, many Americans will be grieving the loss of loved ones, and many more will be faced with financial hardship and concern about the uncertainty of the future. The pandemic has caused a deep recession and levels of unemployment we've not experienced in our lifetimes. At the Federal Reserve, we are working tirelessly to address the economic damage caused by the coronavirus and to put the economy back on a path toward achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In the first half of March, as the pandemic began to unfold in the U.S., the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the federal funds rate effectively to zero. Bringing the policy rate down to this low level reduced interest rates across the economy, making it easier for households and businesses to meet their borrowing needs and fostering favorable financial conditions. Beyond these monetary policy actions, we have taken many additional measures to promote the stability of the financial system and to support the flow of credit. Today, I'm going to focus my remarks on these measures and detail their significance for supporting the economy. But before I continue, let me give the usual disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. A Lesson from History Ensuring liquid and smoothly functioning financial markets are essential roles of central banks, like the Federal Reserve. Yet, it's often poorly understood why these roles are so important for the health of the broader economy. It was the financial crisis that erupted in 1907 that led to the creation of the Federal Reserve System, and as we've planned and executed our response to the current crisis, it's this history lesson I keep returning to. A number of shocks, beginning with the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, led to a run on the banks in 1907. The run on the banks was stemmed by emergency loans from a consortium of private banks, called the New York Clearing House. But a run on less regulated trusts, the "shadow banks" of that time, could not be similarly curtailed. 1 J.P. Morgan brought together a group of young bankers, including Benjamin Strong, who would go on to become the first head of the New York Fed, to examine the books of the trusts. They made loans to the trusts they judged solvent, but the Knickerbocker Trust, the second-largest in the country, did not make the cut, and its collapse precipitated panic throughout financial markets. To stem that panic, Morgan and his banking colleagues lent more generously to the surviving trusts. The consequence of these events was a severe recession, and the U.S. economy contracted more than 10 percent. As a result of the financial sector's inability to contain recurring financial panics, Congress realized the need for the public sector to step in, a process that led in 1913 to the creation of the Federal Reserve System. An Unprecedented Challenge Returning to more recent events, as the pandemic began to unfold in the U.S., we saw intense strain and disruption to financial markets. In response, the Federal Reserve has taken a set of strong and decisive actions to supply liquidity and to assure the continued flow of credit in the economy. 2 The unique nature of this recession—a global pandemic—has required us to design an innovative response. Some of our actions have the hallmarks of those taken during the 2008 financial crisis, but many more have required a fresh approach. As uncertainty about the coronavirus took hold, we saw disruptions in short-term funding markets. Markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, which are normally highly liquid and form the bedrock of our financial system, nearly buckled under the strain of massive flows of funds in response to the pandemic. 3 It's easy to think of financial markets as somewhat divorced from the real economy—most people will never need to worry about a spike in the repo rate or liquidity in the Treasury market. But the reality is that like the events of 1907—and more recently 2008—turmoil in financial markets can have a devastating impact on the wider economy. If credit isn't flowing, people can't finance the purchase of a home, businesses can't invest, and nonprofit organizations and municipalities can't keep essential services going. This is why safeguarding the functioning of financial markets is essential for the health of the broader economy. In response to the extraordinary volatility caused by the pandemic, the Fed greatly expanded its repo operations and began purchasing sizable quantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. These actions to provide massive liquidity have proven successful. They restored market functioning and averted what could have been a much more severe pullback from markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses. 4 Deploying Our Tools In addition to the repo operations and asset purchases, we have established a number of programs to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. 5 I won't go into detail about all of the facilities, but I will emphasize two important points. First, they demonstrate the Fed's strong commitment to prevent lasting damage to the economy. Second, the scale and reach of the response is an indication of the gravity and unique nature of the situation we are facing. Although the facilities differ in important ways, reflecting the specifics of markets and sectors, they all share the goal of keeping credit flowing to households, businesses small and large, and other key segments of the economy. Since the announcements and rollouts of the various facilities, we have seen a significant improvement in the pricing and availability of credit. 6 Somewhat paradoxically, despite the clear effect that these facilities have had on the availability of credit, actual take-up of the facilities has been relatively low. But this is in fact a measure of success—the existence of the facilities, even in a backstop role, has helped boost confidence to the point where borrowers are able to access credit from the private market at affordable rates. It's worth noting that the Federal Reserve does not act alone. As my colleague Chair Powell says, "The Fed has lending powers, not spending powers." 7 Sound healthcare policy and the ability of fiscal authorities to put cash directly in the hands of Americans are both essential for the economy to endure this devastating episode. Conclusion I'll conclude with this: If the history of central banking teaches us one thing, it's that "necessity is the mother of invention." Severe crises demand innovative and decisive responses, and the Federal Reserve is striving to deliver just that. These are unprecedented times, and the pandemic presents truly unique challenges. However, the actions we have undertaken harken back to why the Federal Reserve was created in the first place. That is, to do what only a central bank can do: to keep credit flowing when fear and uncertainty take hold, and in that way to foster a strong economy with maximum employment and stable prices. 1 More information about this financial crisis can be found in Donald P. Morgan and James Narron, The Final Crisis Chronicle: The Panic of 1907 and the Birth of the Fed , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , November 18, 2016. 2 For a more detailed overview of the Federal Reserve's responses to the pandemic-related disruptions in financial markets, see Michael Fleming, Asani Sarkar, and Peter Van Tassel, The COVID-19 Pandemic and the Fed's Response , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , April 15, 2020. 3 The impact of these strains on liquidity in the Treasury market is discussed in Michael Fleming and Francisco Ruela, Treasury Market Liquidity during the COVID-19 Crisis , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , April 17, 2020. 4 For the various New York Fed Open Market Desk statements on the expansion of repo operations during March 2020, see Repo and Reverse Repo Operations . FOMC statements regarding asset purchases at this time include: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 23, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020. The improvement in Treasury market functioning following these actions is discussed in Michael Fleming, Treasury Market Liquidity and the Federal Reserve during the COVID-19 Pandemic , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , May 29, 2020. In the March 23 statements, the FOMC also announced it would start to purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) to smooth market functioning in that market that helps to finance multi-family housing. For more on the deterioration of CMBS market functioning, the Fed purchases and their impact on the CMBS market during this period, see Woojung Park, Julia Gouny, and Haoyang Liu, Federal Reserve Agency CMBS Purchases , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , July 16, 2020. 5 A listing of the new facilities with links to additional information for each facility can be found at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policytools.htm . 6 The effects of the Federal Reserve's actions in establishing these facilities on credit markets are discussed in Nina Boyarchenko, Richard Crump, and Anna Kovner, The Commercial Paper Funding Facility , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , May 15, 2020 ; Antoine Martin and Susan McLaughlin, The Primary Dealer Credit Facility , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , May 19, 2020; Nina Boyarchenko, Richard Crump, Anna Kovner, Or Shachar, and Peter Van Tassel, The Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , May 26, 2020; and Marco Cipriani, Andrew Haughwout, Ben Hyman, Anna Kovner, Gabriele La Spada, Matthew Lieber, and Shawn Nee, Municipal Debt Markets and the COVID-19 Pandemic , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , June 29, 2020. 7 Jerome H. Powell, Current Economic Issues , Speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) (May 13, 2020). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

September 02, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at "In Conversation: New York Fed Presidents on COVID-19" (Bretton Woods Committee Webinar) As prepared for delivery Thank you, Bill. It's great to be with you today, at least virtually, and I am looking forward to our discussion. But before we dive in, I thought I would offer some thoughts on the announcement made last week about the completion of the Federal Open Market Committee's review of its monetary policy framework and the issuance of a new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. 1 Before I continue—and you know what comes next, Bill—let me give the usual disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Allow me to add one last "before" caveat. Before I explain the new statement, it is important to reflect on the context in which the original statement was issued. Then I'll share how the monetary policy framework of today positions us best to achieve our goals and manage the very challenging environment that lies ahead. The original consensus statement was issued back in January 2012 and represented an important step in the Committee's progress toward greater transparency around its goals and strategy. It incorporated key aspects of flexible inflation targeting, a monetary policy framework that had gained wide acceptance around the world. This framework served us well, but the need for change was clear. In the past eight years, basic facts that shaped the original framework have fundamentally changed. First and foremost is the dramatic decline in the neutral interest rate, that is, the short-term interest expected to prevail when the economy is operating at its full potential and inflation is at its longer-run target. Since January 2012, FOMC participants' median estimate of the neutral nominal rate has fallen by 1-3/4 percentage points, from 4.25 percent to 2.5 percent. A similar decline is seen in private sector forecasts and bond yields. 2 This secular decline in interest rates is not limited to the United States—we're seeing it across the globe—and it reflects longer-run trends in demographics, productivity, and other factors that are unlikely to reverse anytime soon. 3 Lower neutral interest rates constrain the ability of monetary policy to offset negative shocks to the economy. This effect has been seen most clearly in the behavior of inflation. Over the past decade, inflation in the United States has been below our 2 percent longer-run target most of the time, and measures of inflation expectations have drifted down. These declines in trend inflation and inflation expectations can create a pernicious feedback loop of reduced policy space and even lower inflation expectations. Again, this experience is not unique to the United States, indicating that it stems from factors common across countries, rather than issues unique to our economy. Indeed, most inflation-targeting advanced economies have struggled to achieve their inflation goals on a sustained basis over the past decade. This brings us to last week's announcement and the issuance of a new consensus statement of our policy framework. It is a culmination of extensive outreach and conversations with communities and stakeholders across the country, careful and thorough analysis, and active discussion and debate among Committee participants. 4 , 5 We took important lessons from the experience of the past decade, reassessed the evidence, and looked at the challenges ahead of us. All this effort was worth it: this new statement means we are better positioned to achieve our goals. In fact, the process worked so well, we've committed to repeating it roughly every five years! The new framework statement directly and effectively addresses the problems caused by a low neutral rate and persistently low inflation. First, it stipulates that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, a temporary overshooting of the longer-run inflation target will likely be desirable to keep inflation and inflation expectations centered on 2 percent. Second, it makes clear that we seek inflation that averages 2 percent over time, consistent with our longer-run target. Finally, the statement makes unequivocally clear that we seek maximum employment and will aim to eliminate shortfalls from this broad and inclusive goal. These changes are mutually reinforcing and will meaningfully improve our ability to achieve both of our dual mandate goals in an environment of a very low neutral rate. I'll conclude with this: The new framework represents both an important evolution in our thinking about how to achieve our goals and another step toward greater transparency. It reaffirms key aspects of the original statement that have stood the test of time and refines others in line with experience and evolving practices. It also makes some more significant changes in light of developments and lessons learned in recent years. And most importantly, it positions us for success in achieving our maximum employment and price stability goals in the future. 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , as amended effective August 27, 2020. 2 Longer-run forecasts of interest rates can be found in Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (Wolters Kluwer). For the decline these forecasts over this period, see the June 2012 and June 2020 issues. 3 See John C. Williams, Three Questions on R-Star , FRBSF Economic Letter, 2017-05 (February 21, 2017), for a discussion of the decline in the natural rate of interest. Estimates of the natural rate for the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the euro area are available at Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest . 4 Jerome H. Powell, New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review , Speech at “Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (via webcast) (August 27, 2020). 5 Richard H. Clarida, The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution , Speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) (August 31, 2020). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
