The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Greater Cleveland Partnership Middle-Market Forum Cleveland, OH September 28, 2016 1 Introduction It is a pleasure to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Since my arrival in Cleveland over two years ago, I have seen first-hand the important role that the Greater Cleveland Partnership plays in supporting the growth of our regional economy and I am very proud to serve on its board. Of course, as president of one of the country’s 12 Federal Reserve Banks I have a keen interest in our regional economy. As we gather in the lobby of this historic building, it is hard not to think back to a time more than 100 years ago and applaud the Congressmen – yes, they were all men back then – who came up with such an ingenious design for our Federal Reserve System. Congress established the Fed in 1913 as a decentralized central bank, independent within the government but not independent from the government. The Fed’s design balances public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. I believe the design has served the country well by allowing monetary policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I make it a point to bring the economic information we have garnered from business, consumer, and labor contacts throughout the District to meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC is the body within the Fed that sets monetary policy. The insightful regional perspectives provided by our directors, advisory council members, and other regional contacts, along with economic and financial data and analysis, all play an important part in the Fed’s setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. I commend Chair Janet Yellen for fostering an atmosphere of serious deliberation and the free exchange of ideas in FOMC meetings. Setting monetary policy is a complex undertaking, and I believe the history of this institution has shown that better policy decisions are made when a diversity of information and views is considered. Some of that diversity was on display when the FOMC met last week and decided to maintain its policy rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. I, along with two of my colleagues, dissented from that consensus decision in 2 favor of moving the federal funds rate up by 25 basis points. The reason I believe a gradual upward path of policy continues to be appropriate and that I favored taking another step on that path in September is because of the realized progress the economy has made on our monetary policy goals and my expectation of further progress. That expectation is based on my outlook for the economy. So today, I would like to discuss my outlook for both the national and regional economy and my views on monetary policy. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The underlying fundamentals supporting the economic expansion remain sound. Household balance sheets have improved greatly since the recession and households feel confident enough to be borrowing again. We have seen sustained progress in the labor market and wages are gradually beginning to accelerate. Oil prices remain low, and while the decline in energy prices has been a considerable negative for the energy-producing sector, it has benefited households and the many businesses that consume energy. The underlying strength in the economy is demonstrated by the resiliency it has shown through a number of bumps along the road of expansion. Some of the recent bumps include the gyrations in financial markets at the beginning of the year, the slowdown in growth in China, economic weakness in Europe, the large appreciation of the dollar between mid-2014 and the start of this year, and the uncertainty surrounding the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union. All forecasts carry risk, and sometimes it is difficult to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from noisy economic and financial market data. With those usual caveats, my modal forecast is that over the next couple of years, the U.S. economy will expand at a pace at or slightly above its longer- run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent; that the unemployment rate will move further below its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent; and that inflation will continue to gradually return to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target. 3 Economic growth U.S. output growth in the first half of the year was quite slow, coming in at only around 1 percent. Much of that sluggishness was due to a decline in business inventories, and so GDP growth underestimated the underlying strength in demand. Based on incoming data, growth is poised to rebound in the second half of the year. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of U.S. output, has been a driver of growth and I expect that to continue. Improving household balance sheets, growth in personal income, low borrowing rates, and low oil prices have all buoyed consumer spending. The housing sector is gradually improving and I expect activity in the sector will continue to expand at a sustainable pace. The monthly home sales numbers have been volatile from month-to-month, reflecting a mixture of supply and demand factors. Builders have been telling us that they are having trouble finding qualified workers in some of the construction trades and they are cautiously avoiding over-building, having learned from the housing boom and crash. Mortgage rates are low, but households are being careful not to take on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending but to those with good credit quality. In contrast to housing, business fixed investment remains weak, and this weakness is somewhat of a puzzle. Given the sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014, it’s not surprising that firms in the drilling and mining sector, their suppliers, and regions whose economies depend on the energy sector were hurt. We have seen the effects in parts of the Cleveland Fed District where steel production, which supplies the energy industry, has been down and other firms tied to energy have cut jobs and reduced investment. But even outside of the energy sector, business investment has been soft despite generally accommodative financial conditions. Manufacturing firms are telling us they are investing, but mainly to sustain current operations rather than to expand. Some of the softness in investment reflects weak demand outside of the U.S., which has hurt U.S. exports. Other firms seem to be using the low interest rate environment to buy 4 back stock rather than to expand plant and equipment spending. More generally, there just seems to be a sense of caution on the part of firms. I expect investment to begin to pick up with economic growth. But the weakness in investment and the associated slow pace of productivity growth pose a risk for the longer-run growth of the U.S. economy. Structural productivity growth is a key determinant of the longer-run growth of output and increases in living standards. And a key determinant of productivity growth is investment in physical and human capital. Labor productivity growth has risen at an annual rate of only one-half percent over the past five years. Part of this weakness is cyclical; some of it reflects longer-run demographics, including the aging of the population, and some of it likely reflects difficulties measuring productivity in the service sector, including intellectual property and information technology. It is difficult to forecast productivity growth, so the recent softness may reverse itself, or it may be longer lasting and reflect a structural issue. If it’s the latter, then the longer-run growth rate of the U.S. economy may be lower than the 2 percent growth I’ve been assuming. Monetary policy cannot affect these longer-term structural aspects of the economy, but it needs to consider them. For example, in an economy with lower trend growth and productivity, the average level of interest rates that balances supply and demand – what economists call the neutral rate of interest – will be lower. But just because monetary policy can’t move the trend growth rate higher doesn’t mean there aren’t other steps the country can take to address these longer-run issues: policies that encourage investments in technology and human capital, tax and regulatory changes, and longer-run fiscal policy should all be under consideration. As this brief overview suggests, some parts of the U.S. economy have fared better than others. But overall, economic growth has proven to be resilient and I expect growth over the next two years to be at 5 or slightly above a trend of around 2 percent. The pace of growth, while lower than in other expansions, has been sufficient to generate significant and sustained progress in labor markets. Labor markets Since the trough in early 2010, the U.S. labor market has added more than 14 million jobs, which is about 10 percent of employment, and the unemployment rate has fallen more than 5 percentage points from its peak of 10 percent in late 2009. The past two years have also seen significant improvements in other gauges of the under-utilization of labor, such as measures tracking the number of part-time workers who would rather work full-time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job. So far this year, firms have added over 1.4 million payroll jobs, an average of about 180,000 jobs per month. That’s well above estimates of trend employment growth, which range from 75,000 to 120,000 per month. We are increasingly hearing from businesses across a broad set of industries that they are having trouble finding qualified workers, both in high-skilled occupations and in lower-skilled jobs. And we are now beginning to see firms respond by raising wages. I expect to see the labor market continue to tighten. Although payroll job growth is projected to slow a bit from the current pace given the progress that’s been made, it will be sufficient to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. I expect the unemployment rate to stay below 5 percent over the next two years. I do not want to underestimate the difficulty that many people have had finding work during the recession and slow recovery and that many continue to have, or the persistent differences in the employment situation faced by different demographic groups in the U.S. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. 6 I recently visited Hazard, Kentucky, a part of the Cleveland District in the heart of Appalachia. I spoke with some coal miners who were graduating from an electrical-fiber optic lineman training program at the Hazard Community and Technical College.1 All 28 graduates had jobs lined up or were entertaining several job offers. Although this is just one program, it does demonstrate that progress can be made in addressing the longer-run workforce development issues our country faces. The Federal Reserve, through its Community Development function, has a role to play in easing such regional transitions. By objective analysis, we can help measure the scope of the problems communities in transition face, determine how best to scale up small, effective programs, and evaluate the pros and cons of alternative approaches and policies. Monetary policy has an important role to play in fostering conditions to ensure that the economy achieves an enduring economic expansion. This economic stability will help those demographic groups – minorities, older workers, lower-income people – who are disproportionately harmed by economic downturns. But monetary policy cannot directly affect longer-run workforce development problems, and from the vantage point of our dual-mandated goals, I believe we are at maximum employment. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s target of 2 percent for quite a while, but it has picked up over the past year. I believe the conditions are in place for a gradual increase in inflation back to 2 percent over the next couple of years. The current low inflation rate partly reflects the effects of earlier declines in the price of oil and other commodities, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which has held down import prices. As these effects have worked 1 The program is part of Kentucky’s Hiring Our Miners Everyday, or H.O.M.E., program, which is housed within the Eastern Kentucky Concentrated Employment Program and is funded by an emergency grant from the U.S. Department of Labor. 7 themselves through, headline PCE and CPI inflation, measured year-over-year, have moved up from the very low levels recorded last year to around 1 percent in recent months. To get a better sense of the underlying trend in inflation, economists often look at other measures of inflation that smooth through or strip out some of the more volatile components. These include core PCE inflation and trimmed-mean PCE inflation, which are both at 1.6 percent and gradually nearing the 2 percent goal, as well as core CPI inflation and median CPI inflation, which are now over 2 percent. Indeed, the Cleveland Fed median CPI measure has been above 2-1/4 percent all year, and at or above 2-1/2 percent for the past four months.2 Stable long-run inflation expectations are an important component of inflation dynamics. We look at a number of different indicators of inflation expectations. Some are based on surveys of consumers and of professional forecasters; others are based on financial market data. The Cleveland Fed’s expectations measure of five-year inflation, five years from now, which combines survey and market data, has been stable this year, in a range of 1-3/4 to 2 percent. 3 Reasonably stable long-run inflation expectations, evidence that inflation is moving up, continued strength in the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend all suggest that inflation is on a path of gradually returning to our 2 percent goal over the next couple of years. Regional growth and labor markets Before I turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy, let me talk about our regional economy. The Cleveland District comprises all of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. Our regional economy is quite diverse, but the 2 The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and- data/median-cpi.aspx. 3 The Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations measure is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators- and-data/inflation-expectations.aspx. 8 path of economic expansion here and the outlook are similar to the nation’s. To be sure, our region tends to be more dependent on manufacturing than other parts of the country. For example, manufacturing accounts for 15 percent of private-sector jobs in Ohio compared to about 10 percent in the U.S. as a whole. So the region has borne the brunt of the weakness in manufacturing. Similarly, the region had enjoyed the benefits of a sharp increase in production and employment in the oil and gas extraction sector as new technologies were brought to bear, but the sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 has resulted in a significant slowdown in natural gas and oil exploration in the Marcellus and Utica shale regions, which include northern Ohio and western Pennsylvania. The weakness in the energy sector is expected to persist somewhat longer, and the longer-term shift away from coal as a source of energy will have lasting effects on the coal-producing parts of the region that have not diversified their economies. 4 On t he other hand, the region has benefited from the strength in auto sales, construction, and the service sector, including health and education. We are seeing a modest pickup in regional manufacturing, particularly in firms that are more focused on domestic markets and the auto sector. The auto industry represents a significant share of manufacturing in Ohio and Kentucky, and over the past few years, District auto plants have produced about 17 percent of the nation’s autos and light trucks. As auto sales have risen to record levels, regional production has risen as well. Our contacts in the District’s auto sector remain optimistic, even though the record sales pace is leveling off. Hous ing markets in the region have shown improvement over time. During the housing boom, we didn’t see the sharp increases in home prices experienced in other parts of the country. But we did suffer from 4 For further discussion of trends in the energy, steel, and auto sectors in the Cleveland Federal Reserve District, see Mark E. Schweitzer, Robert Sadowski, and Christopher Vecchio, “Three Trends Influencing the Region’s Growth,” Forefront, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Janu ary 15, 2016, available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/forefront/ff-v6n03/ff-20160115-v6n03-three- trends-influencing-the-regions-growth.aspx. 9 the housing bust with a large number of foreclosures and vacant properties. The situation has improved. Residential real estate prices in Ohio are now increasing in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent range, with the usual variation across local markets. And according to the Cleveland Fed’s Community Stabilization Index, communities across the Fourth District experienced increased housing market stability in 2015, with mortgage delinquencies and foreclosure rates down.5 Residential builders tell us they are optimistic that regional housing markets will continue to strengthen. L ike the nation, our region has seen considerable improvement in labor markets since the start of the recovery. In Ohio, the unemployment rate peaked at 11 percent in December 2009, and is now down to 4.7 percent. This is near the national average and quite a bit lower than the near 6 percent average Ohio experienced during the last expansion. Since the start of the recovery, Ohio has had a net gain of a half million jobs, and payrolls have now surpassed their previous peak by more than 1 percent. People have been reentering the work force, and over the past year, payroll employment has risen nearly 1-1/2 percent in Ohio – a net addition of 78,000 jobs. Job growth here is somewhat slower than the national pace of 1-3/4 percent, but we are doing considerably better than during the previous expansion, when employment in Ohio was essentially flat. T his is all good news. But like the nation, the regional economy also faces longer-run challenges regarding investments in human and physical capital, as well as low levels of population growth and business formation. These challenges will need to be addressed if we are to remain a region with a healthy economy. 5 The Cleveland Fed’s Community Stabilization Index is a composite index that provides a relative measure of local housing market conditions at the ZIP code level, with a particular focus on recovery potential. It is available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/community-development/community-stabilization-index.aspx. 10 Monetary Policy Let me now turn to monetary policy by first laying some groundwork. The theory and practice of central banking provides several lessons for monetary policymakers. First, policymakers should be forward- looking because monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags. This means policy actions need to be taken before our policy goals are fully met, based on the economic outlook over the medium run and the risks around that outlook. Second, policymakers should strive to be consistent in how they respond to economic conditions and to effectively communicate the rationale for their decisions. This helps the public form expectations about the future path of policy and raises public confidence in the policy itself. Third, policymakers should always remain humble about what they know about the economy and how monetary policy can affect it. There is uncertainty around the outlook, around the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and around underlying structural aspects of the economy, such as the longer-run levels of the unemployment rate, trend output growth, structural productivity growth, and equilibrium interest rates. Policymakers need to recognize that it is possible for the structure of the economy to change, but they should not throw out all that’s been learned from past experience or be led astray by thinking this time is completely different. As I mentioned earlier, last week, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. In the Committee’s view, the case for an interest rate increase has strengthened but it decided for the time being to wait for further evidence of continued progress toward the dual-mandate objectives. According to the new projections, FOMC participants continue to anticipate that a gradual upward path of the policy rate will be appropriate over the next three years. But the consensus view was that it was better not to take the next step on that path in September. I, and two of my FOMC colleagues, dissented from that decision, preferring to see a 25-basis-point increase in September. All participants on the FOMC share the same objective – setting monetary policy 11 to promote our longer-run goals of maximum employment and price stability – even if we disagree from time to time on the best way to achieve those goals. In my view, economic developments have corroborated the Committee’s medium-run outlook that labor markets will continue to show strength, that growth will rebound to a pace at or slightly above trend, and that inflation will gradually rise to our 2 percent target. We have seen sustained improvement in the labor market, which is now basically at full employment from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, and inflation has moved up over the past year. The risks that have concerned the Committee, including the volatility in financial markets at the start of the year, economic weakness abroad, and the aftermath of the U.K. vote to leave the European Union, have subsided, and the economic expansion has proved to be resilient. I view another small step on the gradual upward path as appropriate, not because I want to curtail the expansion, but because I believe gradually moving rates up as we continue to make progress on our goals will help prolong the expansion. It is also consistent with the policy communications we have been issuing for quite a while. I note that the gradual path I’m anticipating means that policy will remain accommodative for some time, continuing to lend support to the economic expansion going forward. The gradual path will also allow us to recalibrate policy over time as we gain more insights into the underlying structural aspects of the post-crisis economy. Now, one can always say it’s better to wait for more information before making a move, and a cautious approach has served us well so far during the expansion. But there are also risks to delaying for too long. If we continue to delay even as we make further progress on our inflation goal and labor markets continue to tighten, we risk having to undertake a considerably steeper policy path later on. Such a strategy is inconsistent with what we have been communicating; it risks confusing the public about our policy rationale and undercutting the credibility of Fed communications. This would cause problems for future 12 policymaking. In addition, if we delay too long and then find ourselves in a situation where the labor market becomes unsustainably tight, price pressures become excessive, and we have to move rates up steeply, we could risk a recession, a bad outcome that history tells us disproportionately harms the more vulnerable parts of our society. I think we also have to recognize that if we fail to exit gracefully from the nontraditional policy actions we took in the aftermath of the crisis – actions I thought were necessary and effective – we could jeopardize their use in the future, should the need arise again. For these reasons, I favor taking the next step on the gradual path of rising interest rates. The lesson that policy should be forward looking is based on the history of poor outcomes when that strategy hasn’t been followed. In the face of evidence that the economy is on track to meet our goals over the medium run, sometimes being prudent means moving the policy rate up. Conclusion Two years ago in one of my first media interviews after becoming president of the Cleveland Fed, I was asked where I saw myself on the avian spectrum – would I be a dove, who would tend to favor low interest rates, or a hawk, who would tend to favor higher interest rates. My answer was that I’d prefer not be thought of as either; instead, my hope was to be viewed as an owl. Of course, that’s not up to me to decide – being thought of as an owl is my aspiration. But what I can do and will continue to do is explain to the public my view of economic conditions, the economic outlook, and the rationale for my policy decisions. I view this as an essential part of Fed communications so that the public can hold us accountable for our policy decisions. I hope that you and our other regional contacts will continue to generously provide the Cleveland Fed with your perspectives on the regional economy. This regional information plays an important role in helping us to set national monetary policy in pursuit of the Federal Reserve’s longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment for the benefit of the public.

Acknowledging Uncertainty Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting New York, NY October 7, 2016 1 Voltaire: Uncertainty is an uncomfortable position, but certainty is an absurd one. Introduction I thank Mickey Levy and the Shadow Open Market Committee for inviting me to speak today. I have known many of the Shadow Committee’s members for quite a long time – longer than I care to admit! Over the years, I have learned much from the position papers and conferences put together by this serious group of economists. I share their view that the active exchange of diverse ideas and careful deliberations ultimately result in better policy decisions. Today, I would like to share my perspective as someone who has participated in some of those policy decisions. I will comment on how I approach monetary policymaking in an uncertain world, review the types of uncertainty policymakers and economists need to deal with, and provide some recommendations for improving monetary policy communications. Of course, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Monetary Policy Communications I believe monetary policy should be set based on the outlook for the economy over the medium run because this is the time horizon over which monetary policy can affect the economy. I focus on underlying fundamentals in determining that medium-run outlook, and I have cautioned against over- reacting to short-term fluctuations in the economic and financial data.1 I believe credible policy communications play a key role in policymaking. It has been well established that when the public has a clearer understanding about how monetary policy is likely to change as economic conditions evolve – whether those changes in conditions are anticipated or not – monetary policy is more effective. Policymakers can improve the public’s understanding by being clear about the goals of monetary policy, 1 See Mester (April 1, 2016). 2 those aspects of the economy monetary policy can and can’t influence, and the economic information that influences their forecasts and policy decisions, as well as by striving to be systematic in their policy responses to changes in economic conditions that influence the outlook. When the public has a clearer understanding of the strategy monetary policymakers follow in normal times, not only will they be able to make better financial and employment decisions, they will also understand when nonstandard monetary policy action is required in extraordinary circumstances. The Federal Reserve has taken many steps over time to improve its policy communications. Recent enhancements include the Chair’s press briefings four times a year, the Summary of Economic Projections, and the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which established an explicit numerical goal for inflation. So CNBC’s August Fed survey of market economists, fund managers, and strategists revealed to my mind some pretty troubling news. Nearly half of the respondents reported that they believe current Federal Reserve policy is mostly influenced by the current data, while less than 40 percent said they think it’s influenced by the medium-run outlook, and the rest were unsure. Sixty percent said they thought the Fed doesn’t have a framework for deciding when to adjust policy, while only about a quarter of the respondents said they think we do. These results suggest to me that our policy communications could benefit from further enhancements. Recently, the FOMC has been describing its policymaking approach as being “data dependent.” Unfortunately, I believe there is some confusion about what the Fed actually means by “data dependent.” This phrase has provided a transition from a period of explicit forward guidance, which was used as a policy tool during the recession and early in the recovery, back to more normal policymaking times.2 But this transition has posed somewhat of a challenge for FOMC communications. After the Great Inflation 2 See Mester (November 20, 2014) for an overview of the use and evolution of forward guidance during the Great Recession and its aftermath. 3 of the 1970s, the FOMC became more predictable and systematic in how it reacted to changes in economic activity and inflation.3 So the public had a pretty good sense of the Fed’s so-called reaction function and explicit forward guidance was rarely used. But the Great Recession required the Fed to behave in a way quite distinct from its past behavior, and consequently, there is less understanding today about how policymakers are likely to react to incoming economic information. Another factor complicating communication is that market participants prefer more explicit statements and less uncertainty. Thus, they may interpret the forecasts of the economy and the appropriate policy path as having more certitude than they actually do, which creates some communications issues when the forecasts and policy path change. The concept of “data dependence” was meant to reinforce the idea that the economy is dynamic and will be hit by economic disturbances that can’t be known in advance. Some shocks will result in an accumulation of economic information that changes the medium-run outlook for the economy and the risks around the outlook in a way to which monetary policy will want to respond. But some of these shocks will not materially change the outlook or policymakers’ view of appropriate policy. Unfortunately, referring to policy as “data-dependent” could be giving the wrong impression that policy is driven by short-run movements in a couple of different data reports. It may even suggest that policy- setting is unsystematic in that the salient data reports may be viewed as changing from meeting to meeting. We seem to find ourselves in a situation where market participants and commentators view any one monthly or quarterly data release as the definitive piece of evidence that will result in either a policy action or no action. Types of Uncertainty I mentioned that market participants tend to like certainty. But that applies more broadly – in many situations, people prefer certainty. But the world is an uncertain place, and I think policymakers should 3 See Taylor (2012). 4 find a better way to acknowledge and convey that uncertainty. The 18th century French philosopher Voltaire said, “Uncertainty is an uncomfortable position, but certainty is an absurd one.” In other words, we might prefer to live in a world with more certainty, but we don’t. And to pretend we do live in such a world is absurd – it can lead to bad outcomes. In terms of economics and monetary policymaking, uncertainty comes into play in a number of ways. For example, price stability and monetary policy are intimately linked, but setting monetary policy to achieve price stability is not trivial. There is uncertainty around our measures and forecasts of inflation and about the transmission of monetary policy to inflation. Recently, economists have been focusing on the uncertainty surrounding the underlying structural aspects of the economy, such as the longer-run levels of the unemployment rate, trend output growth, structural productivity growth, and equilibrium interest rates, and their implications for monetary policy. As former Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan pointed out: “... uncertainty is not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape.”4 Data uncertainty One type of uncertainty economists and policymakers need to confront is data uncertainty. The U.S. statistical agencies provide excellent service using best-practice techniques to gather large volumes of high-quality data on numerous aspects of the economy. But even the highest quality data are inevitably measured with some error and are sometimes subject to revision as more information is gathered. For example, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the 90 percent confidence interval due to sampling error for the monthly change in nonfarm payroll employment is about plus or minus 115,000 jobs.5 Of course, users of the data know this, but we tend to ignore this issue. Charles Manski has written 4 See Greenspan (2004). 5 The surveys are also affected by nonsampling errors, including data collection errors or variation in response rates. See Technical Notes in “The Employment Situation – August 2016,” Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 5 extensively on what he calls the problem of “incredible certitude.”6 Downplaying the fact that the official statistics are measured with error can lead less sophisticated users of the data to believe they are more precisely measured than they actually are. Manski points out that the idea that economists, policymakers, and the statistical agencies should do much more to convey the sense of error around the statistics is not a new idea. It was strongly encouraged more than 50 years ago by Oskar Morgenstern, a founder of the field of game theory.7 Things have improved since then. Revisions in some of the data reports, like GDP growth and employment, routinely get media coverage, and a body of research investigating the implications of data revisions for forecasting, structural modeling, and policy is growing.8 Still, it seems likely that the imprecision in some of the data and the difficulties in forecasting are not fully appreciated. This comes to light every month in the days leading up to the release of the monthly employment report. Economists are polled to see what they expect the monthly number to be, and then when the report is released, the financial press often reports the number as good if it exceeds the consensus estimate or bad if it is weaker than the consensus. Little attention is paid to the dispersion in the economists’ estimates in the first place, to the fact that the number in the release is measured with some error, or to the fact that even a job growth number that comes in less than analysts expected could be strong enough to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. Data revisions complicate making monetary policy in real time.9 PCE inflation, the measure the Fed uses for its inflation goal, is subject to revision. For example, FOMC transcripts and minutes show that in 6 See Manski (2011 and 2015). 7 See Morgenstern (1950 and1963). 8 See Croushore (2011) for a review of the literature on real-time data analysis. 9 As discussed by Croushore (2011), the largest revision ever recorded for quarterly GDP growth was for the fourth quarter of 2008. The first release was made in January 2009 and showed GDP declining 3.8 percent at an annual rate. Just a month later, this number was revised down by 2.4 percentage points, to minus 6.2 percent, confirming the extent of the worst recession since the Great Depression. In the third monthly release in March 2009, the number was revised up a bit to minus 5.4 percent. With the benchmark revisions since then, the reading is now minus 8.2 6 early 2002, policymakers were concerned about a drop in inflation. Ultimately, much of this drop was revised away. Someone reading the transcripts today not knowing that the data were subsequently revised could be quite confused by the discussion. Measurement issues also affect some of the important constructs in macroeconomic models. In a number of papers, Athanasios Orphanides has laid out a convincing case that mismeasurement of slack and other unobservables like the natural rate of interest led to monetary policy mistakes that contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s. He argues that these mismeasured concepts continue to unduly influence monetary policy today and can lead to poor policy decisions that induce undesirable fluctuations in the economy.10, 11 Model uncertainty Economists and policymakers also need to confront model uncertainty.12 Even if we were all to agree on one model of the economy – a heroic assumption to be sure – the parameters governing how economic agents interact with one another would be estimated from the data and would not be precisely known. So there would be uncertainty around forecasts derived from the model and the appropriate policy stance based on the model, even if we knew with certainty what shocks were going to hit the economy in the future. Of course, the situation is even more complicated because economists don’t agree on a single model or a single set of assumptions within a general class of models. Often, there are competing models or different percent. (Data are available in the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s Real-Time Data Set for Macroeconomists.) 10 See, for example, Orphanides and Van Norden (2005) and Orphanides (2015) . 11 A thorny issue related to data uncertainty is uncertainty about the nature of the shocks hitting the economy. For example, to understand the implications of incoming data on jobs, one needs to understand the nature of the factors affecting recent employment growth – are they demand-side factors like growth in output or supply-side factors like a mismatch between skills available and skills in demand? 12 Dennis (2005) presents a useful nontechnical summary of some of the types of uncertainty confronting monetary policymakers. 7 sets of assumptions that are consistent with the observable data.13 Before the financial crisis, we may have convinced ourselves that we could rely on representative agent models, linearized around a steady state, with one interest rate. But the nature of the financial crisis pointed out the inadequacies of these models for understanding the interplay between the real economy and financial markets. The good news is that macroeconomic models are being developed that include more than just a rudimentary financial sector, and policymakers at the Fed and elsewhere are broadening the set of models we routinely consult.14 Nonetheless, while our usual models can give us a pretty good sense of the employment and inflation costs of a change in monetary policy, we are still less able to quantify the financial stability costs and benefits of particular monetary policy paths. So we need to remain humble, and continue to examine the economy’s performance to assess these costs and benefits. Addressing Uncertainty in Theory and Practice Economists and forecasters have developed several techniques to handle uncertainty. Bayesian estimation techniques are commonly used in macroeconomic modeling to handle parameter uncertainty. Given the model and the available data, these Bayesian methods yield probability distributions of forecasts that reflect both uncertainty about the future evolution of the economy and uncertainty about the parameters of the model. Model uncertainty is more difficult to address. But if we know the set of relevant models and can write them down, then Bayesian techniques can also be used to address model uncertainty. In particular, Bayesian techniques can be used to average across multiple models, based on 13 Manski (2011) calls different assumptions generating different projections “dueling certitudes.” He posits a “Law of Decreasing Credibility: The credibility of inference decreases with the strength of the assumptions maintained.” Strong assumptions can yield more definitive conclusions, but if the assumptions are questionable, then those definitive conclusions will be questionable as well. 14 The FOMC has been expanding the models it routinely examines as a part of the policymaking process . These include the Board of Governors staff’s large-scale FRB/US model and two smaller-scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models called EDO and SIGMA, as well as various models maintained and utilized at the Federal Reserve Banks. See the discussion of the Federal Reserve System’s ongoing research on DSGE models in the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22, 2011. Academic researchers are now building model archives to aid in the systematic comparison of empirical results and policy implications across a large set of economic models as an aid to policy analysis. One such archive, The Macroeconomic Model Data Base (MMB), headed by Volker Wieland of Goethe University Frankfurt, currently includes 61 models . See The Macroeconomic Model Data Base (MMB) web page at www.macromodelbase.com for more information on the database; for a discussion of the approach, see Wieland, Cwik, Müller, Schmidt, and Wolters (2012). 8 the models’ relative abilities to fit the data. In this model-averaging approach, appropriate policy would be the policy that performs well on average across the set of models but is not necessarily the best policy in any one particular model.15 A related literature studies setting policy using simple rules that are robust across a variety of model and economic circumstances.16 In some cases, it may not be easy to write down all the models that could characterize the economy or associate probabilities to various outcomes. Nobel Laureates Tom Sargent and Lars Hansen have developed a robust-control approach that can address model uncertainty and misspecification even in these circumstances. Their approach confronts head-on the fact that models are only an approximation to reality and they show the benefit of choosing the policy that produces the best outcome in the worst-case scenario across models. The policymaker doesn’t necessarily expect the worst, but she should plan against it because doing so will lead to acceptable performance across a wide array of circumstances.17 From a practical policymaking standpoint, I find that looking at forecasts from several models gives me a better sense not only of the most likely forecast but also the risks around the forecast. I don’t believe we are at the state of knowledge where a single policy rule can be used to set policy because no rule works well enough across a variety of economic models and in a variety of economic circumstances. But I do find it useful to look at the outcomes of an array of simple, robust monetary policy rules as a benchmark against which to assess current policy. The Cleveland Fed website now publishes the outcomes of seven simple monetary policy rules based on three publicly available forecasts.18 15 Bernanke (2007) discusses these techniques in an accessible way. See Waggoner and Zha (2012) for an application. 16 See, for example, Orphanides and Williams (2002 and 2007). 17 See Sargent (1998) and Hansen and Sargent (2007 and 2011). As discussed in Hansen and Sargent (2001), Brunner and Meltzer (1967) were early proponents of using a min-max strategy for handling model ambiguity. 18 See “Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. In addition to posting current outcomes for the set of rules, the web page includes a tool that allows the user to customize the rules and the forecasted inputs into the rules to generate alternative policy paths. 9 Despite the diversity across the outcomes, I find that the rules provide some discipline in systematically relating incoming data to policy decisions: if the current policy stance is quite different from what the rules suggest, one must carefully consider the factors that support that deviation. One caveat of looking at the outcomes of several models and several rules is that you want to be consistent about it. You must guard against changing which model or rule you favor merely because it happens to produce results that confirm your intuition or preferred policy stance at the time. In terms of policy responses to uncertainty, some results in the literature suggest that when policymakers confront more uncertainty either in their data or models, they should be more cautious in acting, that is, be more inertial in their responses.19 However, subsequent research has shown that this is not generally true. For example, Sargent (1998) points out that caution does not necessarily mean doing less. When there’s uncertainty, it might be better in some cases for policymakers to act more aggressively, not less, because aggressive and preemptive action can prevent the worst-case outcomes from actually coming about.20 Another factor that can affect whether the policymaker should be inertial or not is the public’s understanding of the policymaker’s reaction function and the policymaker’s commitment to following that reaction function. For example, if the policymaker hasn’t effectively communicated, retaining a very accommodative monetary policy stance might be interpreted as signaling a gloomy economic outlook rather than as a preemptive move against downside risk.21 This points out the importance of clear communications, the starting point for this talk and where I’d like to conclude. 19 Aoki (2003) studied the optimal policy response when data are measured with error and concluded that the degree of response to a variable in the policy rule should be less the higher the variable’s measurement error. Brainard (1967) studied optimal policy in response to a shock when there is uncertainty about the e ffect of policy on the economy and concluded that policy should respond less when there is uncertainty than when there is no uncertainty. This result has been shown not to be general across models. 20 Giannoni (2002 and 2007) shows policymakers averse to uncertainty will react more strongly to fluctuations in inflation and the output gap than if there were no uncertainty. They would put more weight on stabilizing inflation and the output gap and less weight on stabilizing the nominal interest rate. 21 See Woodford (2012). 10 Three Recommendations for Monetary Policy Communications It might seem counterintuitive, but I think we would clarify things for the public by acknowledging uncertainty and focusing attention on the medium-run outlook rather than on short-run fluctuations in the data. Let me offer three recommendations that I believe would improve FOMC communications. First, the FOMC should publish confidence bands around the projections in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). Four times a year, the FOMC summarizes Committee participants’ projections of output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the associated appropriate policy path. For the past year, we have also been providing the median projections across the participants for each variable. Although it is a topic of discussion, the FOMC does not publish error bands around these projections.22 I believe we could improve our communications if we did.23 Confidence bands are a standard part of forecasting, illustrating that the future is inherently uncertain. The confidence bands would give the public a better sense of the normal type of forecast variation one should expect to see, so they could better understand some of the risks around the forecast and subsequent changes in the forecast. The confidence bands would also be a helpful reminder to policymakers to remain humble about our ability to know the future with much certainty. Although the public at-large may not be aware of it, the Committee does publish a summary table of the average historical errors of projections from 1996 through 2015 made by various private and government forecasters. We can apply historical errors to the median FOMC projections to get an approximate, symmetric 70 percent confidence interval for each variable, as illustrated in Figures 1-4.24 22 See Minutes of the FOMC Meeting of January 26-27, 2016. 23 The Bank of Canada, Bank of England, European Central Bank, Norges Bank, and the Riksbank all publish a forecast with error bands as part of their communications; in some cases, it is the policymakers’ forecast , and in other cases, it is a staff forecast. 24 Because the September SEP has not yet been published, in the figures, the confidence band s for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation are constructed using the average historical projection errors in Table 2 in the June SEP, and the confidence band for the fed funds rate is constructed using the band illustrated in Chair Yellen’s speech in Jackson Hole in August (Yellen, 2016). 11 As you can see in Figure 3, the error band around the inflation forecast one or two years out is about 1 percentage point. Keeping those confidence bands in mind helps one to judge progress toward our policy goals. In addition, the figure clearly shows that even though the dispersion across FOMC participants often gets media attention, it is actually quite narrow when compared with the confidence band around the inflation forecast. The federal funds rate path differs from the other variables in the SEP because policymakers choose the path. But because there is uncertainty around each participant’s projections of growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, there is also uncertainty around the appropriate policy path. Providing a confidence band would help remind people that the median policy path in the SEP is not meant to be a firm commitment on the part of the FOMC. Instead, policy should be expected to respond to changes in economic and financial conditions that materially affect the medium-run outlook. As you can see in Figure 4, the range of reasonable outcomes for the policy path is actually quite wide, and considerably wider than some of the variation we’ve seen in the SEP policy path over time, even though those shifts have often drawn considerable media attention. My second recommendation is that the FOMC present a forecast that could serve as the benchmark for understanding the FOMC’s policy actions and post-meeting statements. The median paths in the SEP are a step in that direction, but the variables are not linked. So, for example, there is no guarantee that someone projecting the median inflation path would necessarily be projecting the median output path. Publishing a benchmark forecast – with error bands – as do many other central banks would make it somewhat easier to explain how the economic outlook is dependent on the future path of monetary policy. In 2012, the FOMC experimented with developing a forecast representing the consensus of the 12 Committee.25 It proved difficult to reach a consensus on a consensus forecast, but I think we should continue to pursue this.26 In the meantime, we should consider publishing the staff’s forecast. Policymakers need not agree with the staff’s forecast, but they could use it as a benchmark against which to explain how and why their forecasts may differ. My third recommendation pertains to our post-meeting FOMC statement. While it continues to serve the Committee well, I believe the statement could do more to dissuade people from thinking short term, and to illuminate that policy is being formulated based on the medium-run outlook, the risks around the outlook, and the progress on our policy goals. The statement is an important part of FOMC communications, providing information on the mapping from economic conditions to the outlook, and then to policy actions. The current formulation of the statement does highlight factors that are important in that reaction function, namely, the medium-run outlook for inflation, resource utilization, and inflation expectations. But the first paragraph in the statement tends to concentrate on changes in economic conditions since the last FOMC meeting, which can spur a short-run focus. The facts in the paragraph are always true – investment has been soft, unemployment is little changed, employment growth has been solid, on average, and so on. But we could improve the public’s understanding of our monetary policy strategy if we provided more interpretation of those facts – namely, our assessment of how recent changes in economic and financial data have or have not changed the medium-run outlook, the risks around that outlook, and therefore the appropriate policy path. We could also strive for more consistency about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy so that the public would get a better sense of the Committee’s reaction function over time. 25 See the minutes from the July, September, and October 2012 FOMC meetings (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm#11655). 26 Hetzel (2016) provides one proposal for how this might be implemented. 13 Conclusion Uncertainty is the norm, not the exception. I believe it will serve both the public and the FOMC well if we more explicitly acknowledge this uncertainty. Doing so will help the public evaluate whether changes in economic conditions or in the outlook are significant or not. It will help them see that the economy often evolves differently than the modal forecast, and that it is better to focus on the medium run than on short-run fluctuations in the data. It will give them a better sense of what policymakers mean when they say their policy is data-dependent. My suggestions here are simple ones, but I believe they are consistent with the evolutionary changes the FOMC has been making on its journey to increased transparency. Although policy communications will likely always remain somewhat of a challenge, I believe striving for even clearer communications is worth the effort. 14 References Aoki, Kosuke, “On the Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Noisy Indicators,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, April 2003, pp. 501-523. Bernanke, Ben S., “Monetary Policy under Uncertainty,” remarks at the 32nd Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, October 19, 2007. Brainard, William C., “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 57, May 1967, pp. 411-425. Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, “The Meaning of Monetary Indicators,” in G. Horwich, ed. Monetary Process and Policy: A Symposium, Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1967. Croushore, Dean, “Frontiers of Real-Time Data Analysis,” Journal of Economic Literature 49, 2011, pp. 72-100. Dennis, Richard, “Uncertainty and Monetary Policy,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Number 2005-33, November 30, 2005. Giannoni, Marc P., “Does Model Uncertainty Justify Caution? Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 6, 2002, pp. 111-141. Giannoni, Marc P., “Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model with Parameter and Shock Uncertainty,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22, 2007, pp. 179-213. Greenspan, Alan, “Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy,” remarks at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, CA, January 3, 2004 (and published in the American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 94, May 2004, pp. 33-40). Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Wanting Robustness in Macroeconomics,” Chapter 20 in Benjamin J. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics 3B, Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier-North-Holland, 2011, pp. 1097-1157. Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, Robustness, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007. Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Acknowledging Misspecification in Macroeconomic Theory,” Monetary and Economic Studies (Special Edition), Bank of Japan’s Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, February 2001, pp. 213-225. Hetzel, Robert L., “A Proposal to Clarify the Objectives and Strategy of Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper No. 16-11, September 12, 2016. Manski, Charles F., “Policy Analysis with Incredible Certitude,” The Economic Journal 121, August 2011, pp. F261-F288. Manski, Charles F., “Communicating Uncertainty in Official Economic Statistics: An Appraisal Fifty Years after Morgenstern,” Journal of Economic Literature 53, 2015, pp. 631-653. Mester, Loretta J., “Forward Guidance and Communications in U.S. Monetary Policy,” remarks at the Imperial Business Insights Series, Imperial College, London, UK, November 20, 2014. 15 Mester, Loretta J., “The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy: Low-Frequency Policymaking in a High-Frequency World,” remarks at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, NY, April 1, 2016. Morgenstern, Oskar, On the Accuracy of Economic Observations, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1950; second edition, 1963. Orphanides, Athanasios, “Inflation Dynamics: Lessons From Past Debates for Current Policy,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Simon Van Norden, “The Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 37, 2005, pp. 583-601. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2007, pp. 1406-1435. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 2002, pp. 63-145. Sargent, Thomas J., “Discussion of ‘Policy Rules for Open Economies,’ by Laurence Ball,” remarks at the NBER Conference on Monetary Policy Rules, Islamorada, FL, January 15-17, 1998. Taylor, John B. “Monetary Policy During the Past 30 Years with Lessons for the Next 30 Years,” luncheon address at the Cato Institute’s 30th Annual Monetary Conference on Money, Markets and Government: The Next 30 Years, Washington, D.C., November 15, 2012 (published in Cato Journal 33, Fall 2013, pp. 333-334). Waggoner, Daniel F., and Tao Zha, “Confronting Model Misspecification in Macroeconomics,” Journal of Econometrics 171, 2012, pp. 167-184. Wieland, Volker, Tobias Cwik, Gernot J. Müller, Sebastian Schmidt, and Maik Wolters, “A New Comparative Approach to Macroeconomic Modeling and Policy Analysis,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 83, 2012, pp. 523-541. Woodford, Michael, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” in The Changing Policy Landscape, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, 2012, pp. 185-288. Yellen, Janet L., “The Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future,” remarks at “Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, WY, August 26, 2016. 16 17

The National and Regional Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Annual Business Luncheon Pittsburgh, PA November 30, 2016 1 Introduction I thank Doris Carson Williams and members of the African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania for inviting me to speak today about the economy and monetary policy. As you may know, in addition to being president and CEO of the Chamber, Doris chairs the board of the Pittsburgh Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank Doris for her service to my organization and to the country. In her role as chair, Doris brings us a wealth of information on the regional economy, information she has gathered from the entrepreneurs and other contacts in the region. I am sure that many of you provide Doris with insights into how your businesses and communities are faring, so I’d like to also thank you for your service. The Cleveland Fed represents the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which comprises western Pennsylvania, as well as the state of Ohio, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I make it a point to bring the economic information we have garnered throughout the District from business, consumer, and labor contacts to meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC is the body within the Fed that sets monetary policy. The regional information, along with economic and financial data and analysis, plays an important part in the FOMC’s setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. Indeed, the regional structure of the Federal Reserve has served the country well for more than 100 years. Congress established the Fed in 1913 to operate in the public interest to promote the health of the U.S. economy and financial system. Congress designed the Fed as a decentralized central bank, independent within the government but not independent from the government. The Fed’s design balances public- sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks distributed across the country and overseen by the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This design allows monetary policy decisions to take 2 into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. The regional structure also helps us to carry out our other responsibilities. In addition to setting national monetary policy, the Fed is also responsible for supervising and regulating banks and other important financial institutions, promoting the stability of the financial system, playing a major role in overseeing the nation’s payments system and providing certain financial services to the U.S. government, and identifying effective community development policies and best practices for promoting economic progress and access to credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Today, I would like to focus on our monetary policy role by discussing my outlook for both the national and regional economy and my views on monetary policy. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economic expansion is now in its eighth year, and considerable progress has been and continues to be made on both parts of the Fed’s statutory goals of full employment and price stability. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the economic expansion remain sound. Growth has been moderate, and although the quarterly pattern has had its share of ups and downs, the economy has been resilient to a number of shocks throughout the expansion. One of those shocks, the sharp decline in energy prices between mid-2014 through the end of 2015, was a major negative for the energy-producing sector and its suppliers in this region and elsewhere. Still, the economy and, in particular, employment growth persevered. All forecasts carry risk, and sometimes, it is difficult to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from noisy economic and financial market data. With these usual caveats in mind, my modal forecast is that over the next couple of years, the U.S. economy will expand at a pace at or slightly above its longer-run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent; that the unemployment rate will move further 3 below its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent; and that inflation will return to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target. Economic growth After a slow first half, U.S. output growth picked up in the third quarter. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of U.S. output, has been the driver of growth and I expect that to continue. Improving household balance sheets, growth in personal income, low borrowing rates, and low oil prices have all supported consumer spending. Smoothing through the monthly volatility in housing sales, starts, and permits indicates that the housing sector is gradually improving. I expect activity in the sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. The gradual nature of the housing recovery likely reflects a mixture of supply and demand factors. Builders report that they are having trouble finding qualified workers in some of the construction trades, and they are avoiding over-building, having learned from the housing boom and crash. Mortgage rates are low, but households are being careful not to take on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending, but to those with good credit quality. In contrast to consumer spending and housing, manufacturing has been restrained and business fixed investment has been weak. As I mentioned earlier, part of the weakness in investment reflects the impact that the earlier sharp drop in oil prices had on the drilling and mining sectors and their suppliers. In western Pennsylvania, steel production, which supplies the energy sector, has been down and firms tied to the energy sector have had to cut jobs and curtail investment plans. On a positive note, oil prices have stabilized and are up somewhat this year, and we have started to see a pickup in oil drilling activity. The relatively slow growth of our trading partners, which has led to an appreciation in the value of the dollar, has also weighed on manufacturing and investment at firms that are reliant on exporting goods. But even outside of the energy- and trade-related sectors, business investment has been soft despite generally accommodative financial conditions. Some firms seem to be using the low interest rate environment to 4 buy back stock rather than to expand plant and equipment spending. More generally, there just seems to be a sense of caution on the part of businesses. I do expect investment to begin to pick up with economic growth, which would be welcome because a stronger pace of capital spending would help raise labor productivity growth from recent low levels. This is important because structural productivity growth is a key determinant of the longer-run growth rate of output and of living standards. And a key determinant of productivity growth is investment in physical and human capital. Labor productivity growth has risen at an annual rate of a little above a half of a percent over the past five years. Part of this weakness is cyclical; some of it reflects longer-run demographics, including the aging of the population, and some of it likely reflects difficulties measuring productivity in the service sector, including intellectual property and information technology. It is difficult to forecast productivity growth, so the recent softness may reverse itself, or it may be longer lasting and reflect a structural issue. If it’s the latter, then the longer-run growth rate of the U.S. economy may be lower than the 2 percent growth I’ve been assuming. Small businesses I do not need to tell this audience about the important role that small and new businesses play in the U.S. economy. The vast majority of firms in the U.S. are small businesses; in fact, three-quarters of U.S. businesses have fewer than 10 employees. So while it is true that large and mature businesses employ the most people, still, over a quarter of U.S. private-sector jobs are at firms with fewer than 50 employees, and over half are at firms with fewer than 500 employees.1 Digging deeper into the data, economist John Haltiwanger and his co-authors have documented the important role played, in particular, by young firms. This group includes new firms, which are almost all small to begin with. Their research shows that young firms disproportionately contribute to both overall job creation and job destruction in the U.S. economy, 1 Data from Supplemental Tables F and G of the National Business Employment Dynamics Data, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics indicate that as of 2016Q1, 28 percent of private-sector employment (20.5 million jobs) was at firms with fewer than 50 employees, and 95 percent of firms have fewer than 50 employees. These tables and others are available at http://www.bls.gov/bdm/bdmfirmsize.htm. 5 and on average, over the 1990s and until the Great Recession, business start-ups accounted for about 3 percent of total employment per year.2 More recent data show that since the Great Recession, this share has fallen to around 2 percent,3 which brings up a cautionary note about our economy. An enviable aspect of the U.S. economy around the globe is our spirit of innovation, entrepreneurship, ease of business entry and exit, and labor market flexibility. Small and young businesses have played an important role in the dynamics of the U.S. economy. This dynamism has contributed to economic growth and well-being in the U.S. It allows resources to be reallocated from less-productive to more-productive businesses and allows workers to move up the career ladder, resulting in higher productivity growth and rising incomes. But research by Haltiwanger and others has shown that the degree of dynamism in the U.S. economy has been declining for some time. As indicated above, the start-up rate has been declining, and since 2000, key innovative sectors like high-tech have seen a sharp slowing in the rate of start-ups.4 The decline in business and labor market dynamism may be contributing to the slowdown we’ve seen in productivity growth.5 To better understand one factor important to start-ups and small firms, for the past three years, the Federal Reserve has conducted a survey on small-business credit. In 2015, seven Reserve Banks, including the Cleveland Fed, collaborated on the survey, gathering responses from over 5,400 firms with fewer than 2 See John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus Young,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (May 2013), pp. 347-361. 3 Author’s calculations based on the firm age table from the Business Dynamics Statistics, Firm Characteristics Data Tables, U.S. Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/data_firm.html). 4 See John Haltiwanger, “Top Ten Signs of Declining Business Dynamism and Entrepreneurship in the U.S .,” paper written for the Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth conference, August 2015. 5 Haltiwanger (2015), p. 9. 6 500 employees and located in 26 states.6 The 2015 results indicate that among the more than 3,400 employer firms – those small businesses employing at least one person in addition to the owner – both firm performance, in terms of the share reporting profitability and revenue growth, and financing success improved over the previous year. Slightly less than 50 percent of surveyed employer firms applied for credit and about half of those received all the credit they sought. Among the firms receiving less credit than they wanted, micro-businesses (those firms with less than $100,000 in annual revenue) and start-ups had somewhat less success in gaining credit approval. The differential in credit approval by revenue and age of firm may appropriately reflect the risks entailed in lending to these types of firms. Nonetheless, it does point out that the availability of credit is one of the challenges smaller and younger firms are facing as they try to grow, and that appropriate access to credit will remain a key attribute of an innovative economy. As this brief overview suggests, some parts of the U.S. economy have fared better than others. But overall, economic growth has proven to be resilient, and I expect growth over the next two years to be at or slightly above a trend of around 2 percent. The pace of growth, while lower than in other expansions, has been sufficient to generate significant and sustained progress in labor markets. Labor markets In fact, since the employment trough in early 2010, the U.S. labor market has added more than 15 million jobs, about a 10 percent increase. The national unemployment rate has fallen more than 5 percentage points from its peak of 10 percent in late 2009. In addition, other gauges of the under-utilization of labor have improved significantly. These include the broader measures of unemployment that track the number of part-time workers who would rather work full time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job. 6 See “2015 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms,” Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Atlanta, Boston, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Richmond, and St. Louis, March 2016 . Other information about the survey is available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/community-development/small-business/about-the-joint-small- business-credit-survey/2015-joint-small-business-credit-survey.aspx. 7 So far this year, firms have added slightly more than 1.8 million payroll jobs, or around 180,000 jobs per month. That’s well above estimates of trend employment growth, which range from 75,000 to 120,000 per month depending on what one assumes about labor force participation. Demographic factors, including the aging of our population, have resulted in a downward trend in labor force participation, which is one of the reasons trend employment growth is lower than it was a few decades ago. As labor market progress has been made, we have been hearing increasingly from our labor and business contacts across a broad set of industries that firms are having trouble finding qualified workers, both in high-skilled occupations and in lower-skilled jobs, and that they are responding by raising wages. Now those anecdotal reports are showing through to the wage data where measures such as the employment cost index and average hourly earnings are accelerating moderately from year-ago levels. I expect to see the labor market continue to tighten somewhat over the next couple of years. Although payroll job growth is likely to slow a bit from its current pace given the progress that’s already been made, it will be sufficient to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. I expect the unemployment rate to stay below my estimate of its longer-run rate of 5 percent over the next two years. So in my view, we have met the maximum employment part of our monetary policy dual mandate; that is, maximum employment from the standpoint of what monetary policy can achieve. In saying that, I certainly do not want to underestimate the difficulty in finding work that many people have had and some continue to have, or the persistent differences in the employment situation faced by different demographic groups in the U.S. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. While the overall economy will benefit from these forces, many individuals and some regions are adversely affected by these structural trends. Government policies and programs, and public-private partnerships, can and should be brought to bear to help people and communities make the transition. 8 A promising start is being taken right here in Pittsburgh to help ensure that people are developing the skills that will be needed in the workforce of the future, and that those providing the education and training understand what those jobs will be. Earlier this year, the Allegheny Conference on Community Development published an in-depth analysis of the expected supply and demand for labor in the Pittsburgh region over the next decade and made a number of recommendations to help the region prepare for the coming changes.7 One recommended initiative would create a digital career awareness hub to help teachers and students in kindergarten through high school better match curriculum offerings and choices to the skill sets in demand in the future. Another would create a digital jobs database to make it easier to match those with particular skills to employers currently in need of those skills. A further recommendation is to focus resources on high-growth “opportunity occupations,” positions that pay higher than the median wage but don’t require a bachelor’s degree. This diverse group of occupations includes certain jobs in health care, transportation, and bookkeeping.8 The Federal Reserve, through its Community Development function, has a role to play in easing these types of transitions. Our objective analysis can help in evaluating the pros and cons of various policies and programs, and provide guidance on how to best scale-up those programs found to be most effective. Although I don’t believe monetary policy is the right tool for solving the longer-run workforce development issues facing our economy, I do believe monetary policy can positively contribute by fostering conditions to ensure that the economy achieves an economic expansion that endures. This economic stability will help those demographic groups – minorities, older workers, and lower-income people – who are disproportionately harmed by economic downturns. 7 “Inflection Point: Supply, Demand and the Future of Work in the Pittsburgh Region,” report prepared by Burning Glass Technologies and the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning with Allegheny Conference on Community Development, May 2016. 8 Research by the Federal Reserve suggests that even in opportunity occupations, employers are dem anding higher levels of skills than they did in the past, both technical skills and so-called soft skills such as being able to handle ambiguity and to effectively communicate. See “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies,” Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. 9 Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s target of 2 percent for a while, but it has picked up over the past year and I believe the conditions are in place for a return to 2 percent over the next couple of years. As the drags from earlier declines in oil prices and non-petroleum imports have dissipated, year-over-year headline inflation measures have moved up, from the very low levels recorded last year to over 1 percent in recent months. To get a better sense of the underlying trend in inflation, economists often look at measures that smooth through or strip out some of the more volatile components. These include core PCE inflation and trimmed-mean PCE inflation, which are gradually nearing the 2 percent goal, as well as core CPI inflation and median CPI inflation, which are now over 2 percent. Indeed, the Cleveland Fed median CPI measure has been above 2-1/4 percent all year, and near 2-1/2 percent for the past several months.9 What people think inflation will be over the long run – what economists call inflation expectations – is an important factor that influences the path inflation actually takes. If people are confident that the Fed will set monetary policy to achieve 2 percent inflation over the long run – in other words, if longer-run inflation expectations are stable – then they will look through shocks that temporarily raise or lower inflation when they make financial or business decisions. This helps inflation move back toward the target after the effect of the shock dissipates. To assess whether inflation expectations are stable, we look at a number of different measures and indicators. Some are based on surveys of consumers and of professional forecasters; others are based on financial market data. The Cleveland Fed’s expectations measure of five-year inflation, five years from now, which combines survey and market data, has been stable this year, in a range of 1-3/4 to 2 percent.10 After dipping earlier in the year, other measures have risen in recent weeks. Based on the various measures, in my view, long-run inflation expectations have been reasonably stable. This, along with evidence that inflation is moving up, the continued strength in 9 The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and- data/median-cpi.aspx. 10 The Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations measure is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our- research/indicators-and-data/inflation-expectations.aspx. 10 the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend all suggest that inflation is on a path of returning to our 2 percent goal over the next couple of years. Regional growth and labor markets As I mentioned at the start of my talk, assessing regional economic conditions plays an important role in setting national monetary policy, so let me spend a few minutes discussing the Pittsburgh-area economy. The Pittsburgh region has undergone the type of regional economic transformation I discussed earlier, moving from an economy that was dependent largely on steel, coal mining, and heavy industry, to one that has diversified into health care, education, financial services, and technology.11 This is a promising development because we have seen that regions that remain dependent on one particular industry have fared less well over time than those that have been able to diversify their industrial bases and adapt to the changing economy. The path of the economic expansion in Pittsburgh reflects its industrial mix and the nature of the shocks that have hit the economy during the expansion. The Great Recession took its toll on the region, as it did in the rest of the nation, and the region is also sharing in the benefits of the expansion. Indeed, Pittsburgh was an early achiever in the recovery. In 2012, Pittsburgh was one of the first major U.S. metropolitan areas to see payroll jobs move back up to pre-Great Recession levels. The U.S. as a whole didn’t achieve this milestone until mid-2014, and Pennsylvania, not until 2015. But since 2012, job growth in Pittsburgh has been relatively flat, while jobs in Pennsylvania and the U.S. have been expanding. A similar story can be told about Pittsburgh’s 11 Pittsburgh has a higher share of employment in the service-producing sector than does the U.S., and this share has risen over time, from about 71 percent of employment in the 1990s to about 77 percent today. The comparable shares in the U.S. are 64 percent and 71 percent, respectively. The share of employment in the education and health services component of services in Pittsburgh is higher than in the U.S., and it has shown considerable growth over time. In Pittsburgh, this share rose from 17 percent in the 1990s to 21 percent today. The comparable shares in the U.S. are 11 percent and 16 percent, respectively. (Author’s calculations using payroll employment data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.) 11 unemployment rate. After falling sharply from a peak of over 8 percent in 2010 to under 5 percent early this year, the unemployment rate has moved up to 6 percent, about a percentage point higher than the national level. Some of the recent weakness in the regional labor markets is related to the earlier drop in energy prices. The Marcellus region is now the most important shale-based source of natural gas in the U.S., accounting for about 40 percent of domestic natural gas from shale sources. As a result, among the 50 states, Pennsylvania is now the second-largest producer of natural gas behind Texas. But while the region gained as the natural gas industry developed, the recent contraction in the industry has been a negative. Over 2014 and 2015, both natural gas prices and the number of active rigs in the Marcellus region were cut in half, resulting in considerable job losses and lower earnings. This year, natural gas prices have begun to increase, and since the summer, the number of active rigs has picked up as well. Although Allegheny County is less exposed to the natural gas sector than other parts of the Marcellus region, it felt the spillovers of lower energy prices, as well as slower global growth, both of which put a considerable drag on the steel industry. Here, too, the modest rise in oil prices this year has been a positive development. Another positive is the region’s well-educated workforce. Among the 100 largest metropolitan areas, Pittsburgh ranks in the top half in terms of the percentage of its population holding a bachelor’s degree or higher, and among people aged 25 to 34, its ranking rises to 12th out of 100.12 This bodes well because when it comes to the economic well-being of entire regions, many studies have documented the importance of investments in human capital.13 As a home to strong universities and a well-educated 12 According to the 2015 data from the American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau, Tables B15001 and B15002, for the U.S. as a whole, about 31 percent of the population and about 34 percent of the population aged 25 to 34 hold a bachelor’s degree or higher; for Pittsburgh, the comparable numbers are 33 percent and 46 percent, respectively. 13 For example, Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth. See “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. 12 workforce, Pittsburgh is already attracting and sustaining many of the businesses of the future. No doubt, this made Pittsburgh an excellent choice to host this October’s White House Frontiers Conference on the future of innovation both in the U.S. and around the world. In addition to a quality workforce, research shows that effective leadership can make a big difference in how regional economies navigate the type of transition Pittsburgh has accomplished. I commend the African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania for its leadership in the region. Monetary Policy Let me now turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy. All participants on the FOMC share the same objective – setting monetary policy to promote our longer-run goals of maximum employment and price stability. In setting monetary policy, we assess the realized progress the economy has made on our goals and our expectation of further progress based on the economic outlook over the medium run and the risks to the outlook. In my view, economic developments have corroborated the Committee’s medium-run outlook that labor markets will continue to show strength, that growth will rebound to a pace at or slightly above trend, and that inflation will gradually rise to our 2 percent target. We have seen sustained improvement in the labor market, which, in my view, is now basically at full employment from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, and inflation has been moving up closer to our goal. I view the risks to the outlook as broadly balanced. The current target range for our policy rate, the federal funds rate, is 1/4 to 1/2 percent, which is quite accommodative. When the Committee met in early November, it assessed that the case for moving the policy rate up had continued to strengthen but decided, for the time being, to wait for some further evidence of continued progress toward the dual-mandate objectives. I, and one of my colleagues, dissented from that decision, preferring to see a 25-basis-point rise. 13 I view a small step up in interest rates as appropriate, not because I want to curtail the expansion, but because I believe it will help prolong the expansion. We know that monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags, so policy actions have to be taken before our policy goals are fully met. The lesson that policy should be forward looking is based on the history of poor outcomes when that strategy hasn’t been followed and we’ve fallen far behind the curve. If we delay too long and then find ourselves in a situation where the labor market becomes unsustainably tight, price pressures become excessive, and we have to move rates up steeply, we could risk a recession, a bad outcome that disproportionately harms the more vulnerable parts of our society. Delaying for too long might also induce investors to search for yield, raising risks to financial stability. I do not think we are behind the curve yet, but I think the risks to macroeconomic stability and to financial stability will grow over time should we fail to take appropriate action given where we are on our goals and the current low level of our policy rate. I view another increase in interest rates as a prudent step to take. I anticipate that a gradual upward path of policy is likely to be appropriate given economic developments. That means that the policy rate won’t be moving up at each meeting and that policy will remain accommodative for some time, continuing to lend support to the economic expansion going forward. It will allow us to recalibrate policy over time as we gain more insight into the underlying structural aspects of the post-crisis economy and as the economy evolves. Conclusion Between now and when the FOMC next meets in December, I will continue to assess economic and financial conditions to see if any change is warranted in my medium-run outlook. My colleagues on the FOMC will be doing that too, and, in December, the FOMC will provide a new set of forecasts summarizing our current views on the economy and monetary policy. I look forward to the meeting, and I commend Chair Janet Yellen for fostering an atmosphere of serious deliberation and the free exchange of ideas in FOMC meetings. Setting monetary policy is a complex undertaking, and I believe the history 14 of the Fed has shown that better policy decisions are made when a diversity of information and views is considered. Sometimes I’m asked whether the FOMC routinely coordinates our monetary policy actions with those of other countries. The answer is no – we set our monetary policy to promote our goals of maximum employment and price stability in the U.S.14 But we operate in a global economy and there are ties among economies and financial markets, so we must consider economic and financial developments abroad to the extent they affect the outlook for the U.S. economy. For example, weak growth abroad has been a drag on our economy because it has meant weaker U.S. export growth. Similarly, the appreciation in the value of the dollar that began in mid-2014 put downward pressure on inflation by holding down import prices. So these developments factored into our assessment of appropriate monetary policy. U.S. fiscal policy is also part of the economic environment. The prospects for some changes to fiscal and other economic policies, such as infrastructure spending, tax code changes, immigration policy, and trade policy, have likely increased. But the form any policy change will take, the timing of passage, and the timing and size of the impacts are very uncertain at this point. When we gauge the effects of any forthcoming fiscal and other economic policy changes on the outlook for growth, employment, and inflation, the devil will be in the details. As we gain more clarity about the policies that might be forthcoming, the FOMC will assess their effects, as well as the implications of economic and financial developments, on the medium-run economic outlook and appropriate monetary policy. Monetary policy is not on a pre-set course and we will continue to use the best available models, analysis, and judgment to assess the situation. As an FOMC 14 An exception is that during times of extreme stress in financial markets, central banks have coordinated action to promote orderly market functioning. For example, during the financial crisis, the Fed, Bank of Canada, Bank of England, European Central Bank (ECB), and Swiss National Bank issued a joint statement announcing certain actions being taken to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets, including the authorization of temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines). (See the press release dated December 12, 2007: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20071212a.htm.) Another example was the announcement of a reciprocal swap line between the Fed and the ECB after the terrorist attacks on 9/11. (See the press release dated September 13, 2001: https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/press/general/2001/20010913/default.htm.) 15 member, I will remain focused on and committed to setting monetary policy to promote the Federal Reserve’s longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment for the benefit of the public.
