Economic Outlook and Communicating Monetary Policy The 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast and Annual Meeting of the Main Line Chamber of Commerce and the Main Line Chamber Foundation Gladwyne, PA February 1, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Outlook and Communicating Monetary Policy The 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast and Annual Meeting of the Main Line Chamber of Commerce and the Main Line Chamber Foundation Gladwyne, PA February 1, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Good morning and thank you for inviting me to participate in the 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast. We are in that season when traditionally we reflect upon the past year and look ahead. So in the spirit of the season, I will give you my take on the economic outlook. Then I want to spend the remainder of my time discussing recent steps taken by the FOMC to enhance the way we communicate about monetary policy. Before I begin, though, I should note that one of the strengths of the Federal Reserve System and its Federal Open Market Committee is that it brings together a wide range of independent assessments of economic conditions and perspectives on policy. As that famous American journalist Walter Lippmann once said: “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much.” So let me assure you that there is a lot of thinking going on among policymakers at the Fed, but my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic Outlook Let me start with some general comments on the state of the economy as we enter 2012. A year ago, most economists were forecasting that economic growth would be 3 2 percent or a bit more in 2011. Instead, the latest numbers released last Friday showed that real GDP in 2011 was 1.6 percent, compared to 3.1 percent in the prior year. Some of this weakness is perfectly understandable, given the shocks we experienced throughout most of the year. Last year began with severe snowstorms in the East. As 2011 progressed, there were the earthquake and ensuing disasters in Japan, followed by the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, which led to a run‐up in oil prices. In addition, there were renewed concerns about European sovereign debt and the midsummer uproar in Washington over fiscal policy and the debt ceiling. All of these events weighed heavily on growth, as well as on business and consumer confidence. Yet, the economy persevered. Indeed, growth accelerated across each of the four quarters, from less than 0.5 percent in the first quarter to around 2‐3/4 percent in the fourth quarter. I anticipate that we will continue to see moderate growth of around 3 percent for 2012 and 2013, which is slightly above trend. Business spending, especially investments in equipment and software, was relatively healthy last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. In January, the Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey showed that regional manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, the fourth consecutive monthly increase since a late summer lull. The survey’s measures of future activity also indicated that our respondents expect activity to continue to pick up over the next six months. I take this as a sign that business sentiment is also improving. On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization but not much improvement in 2012. We entered the Great Recession over‐invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to see a housing recovery until the surplus inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. Even as the economy rebalances, we should not seek nor should we expect housing and related sectors to return to those pre‐recession highs. Those exuberant days were simply not sustainable, and it would be a mistake to retain that standard as our benchmark for recovery. 3 The housing crash destroyed a great deal of wealth for the average consumer and the economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals and many businesses. Moreover, the losses cannot be papered over with monetary policy nor should it try to do so. Households and businesses, however, continue to make progress on restoring the health of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. Most economists, including myself, believe that this process will continue into 2012. But the drag on growth from this rebalancing will gradually lessen over time. While there is a long way to go in restoring a vibrant labor market, I am encouraged by the employment reports released over the past several months. The December employment report showed a net gain of 200,000 jobs and a decline in the unemployment rate to 8.5 percent. The economy added over 1.6 million jobs during 2011, and the unemployment rate fell nearly a full percentage point. Interestingly, the last time the unemployment rate fell by this much in one year was in 1995. As growth continues and strengthens, I expect further gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling to around 8 percent or a little less, by the end of 2012. Of course, forecasting is a hazardous business, even in the best of times, and we should all take any economic forecast with at least a grain or two of salt – if not more. So it is important to recognize that there are some obvious risks to the growth forecast. The largest of these are the ramifications for the U.S. economy of the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. An economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely restrain U.S. exports. And while strains in financial markets have been limited to European institutions so far, the situation bears watching to ensure that there are no adverse spillovers to U.S. financial institutions. Of course, regardless of how the European situation plays out, it has already imposed considerable uncertainty on growth prospects for the global economy. That uncertainty has been compounded by our own nation’s inability to establish a clear plan to put our fiscal policy on a sustainable path. Until the economic environment 4 becomes clearer, firms and consumers are likely to postpone significant spending and hiring decisions – posing a drag on the recovery, even as economic developments in the U.S. continue to improve. Just as growth was weaker in 2011 than many forecasters had anticipated, inflation was higher. A year ago, many were concerned about the risks of a sustained deflation. I was not among them. Instead, I thought we would see inflation at about 2 percent for the year. It turns out we were all wrong. Total inflation in 2011, as measured by the CPI on a year‐over‐year basis, was 3 percent, reflecting strong increases in energy and food prices, particularly in the early part of the year. Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, rose to about 2.2 percent. I anticipate, however, that with many commodity prices now leveling off or falling, and inflation expectations relatively stable, inflation will moderate in the near term. Indeed, total inflation has been more subdued over the past several months. As a policymaker, though, I focus less on the near term and more on the medium term. Given the very accommodative monetary policy that has been in place for more than three years, I believe we must continue to monitor inflation measures very carefully. Inflation most often develops gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often thought to prevent inflation from rising. But that did not turn out to be true in the 1970s. Thus, we need to proceed with caution as to the degree of monetary accommodation we supply to the economy. So let me review some of the policy actions the Fed has taken. Monetary Policy As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to support the recovery. We have also conducted two rounds of asset purchases 5 that have more than tripled the size of the balance sheet and changed its composition from short‐term Treasuries to longer‐term Treasuries and housing‐related securities, mostly mortgage‐backed securities. In the most recent meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee announced that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014” – that’s almost three years from now. Last August when the FOMC first signaled a time frame for continued low rates, it was until mid‐ 2013. So our announcement last week lengthened the period of anticipated very low rates by 18 months. In addition, the Committee announced that the Fed intends to continue the maturity extension program, or “operation twist,” first launched last September. In this program, to be completed by the end of June, the Fed is buying $400 billion of longer‐term Treasuries and selling an equal amount of shorter‐term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce yields from already historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September because it was not clear to me that further monetary policy accommodation was appropriate. After all, inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year. Moreover, policy actions are never free; they need to be evaluated based on a thorough analysis of costs and benefits. I believed that the benefits of further monetary policy easing were small at best, since, in my view, they would do little to help resolve the challenges we face on the employment front. But the potential costs of this further accommodation could translate into a steady rise in inflation over the medium term, even without much of a drop in the unemployment rate. In my assessment, the potential costs of further accommodation outweighed the potential benefits. For similar reasons, I was not supportive of the most recent decision to extend the time frame for exceptionally low rates through 2014. In my view, economic conditions have 6 modestly improved since our December meeting, especially on the employment front, and the downside risk of a double‐dip recession that many feared in September when the Committee instituted “operation twist” has substantially abated. Thus, with the economy gradually improving, I saw little justification to further ease monetary policy and felt it risked undermining confidence in the process. In addition, I don’t support the practice of offering forward policy guidance by saying economic conditions are likely to lead to low rates through some calendar date. Such statements are, in my mind, particularly problematic from a communications perspective. Monetary policy should be contingent on the economic environment and not on the calendar. For example, I often read comments in the media that the FOMC has “pledged” or “vowed” to keep rates at zero at least until late 2014. But this is clearly incorrect. The FOMC has made no such commitment and the statement indicates as much – if economic conditions change, then so will policy. Yet there continues to be confusion and the confusion stems from our statement. In my view, there are much better ways to communicate information about the future path of policy than the use of calendar dates. Indeed, one of these ways was provided in January when we began providing information on the policy paths that underlie FOMC participants’ forecasts. Improving Communications So let me turn to our communication initiatives, which have received a fair amount of attention in the financial press. Improving the transparency of monetary policy has always been high on my list of things to do since joining the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia in 2006. The Federal Reserve is accountable to the public, so it needs to clearly communicate its goals and its approach to making policy decisions. To its credit, the Federal Reserve has strived to increase transparency about its actions and its policies, particularly during the tenure of Chairman Ben Bernanke. For instance, 7 in an effort to improve its communications to the public, the FOMC decided in 2007 to release its Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, four times a year. In 2011, Chairman Bernanke introduced press briefings to provide additional context for the FOMC's policy decisions following the release of the SEP. However, until now, these releases did not include any information about the assumptions policymakers made about the path of monetary policy. Therefore, it was difficult for the public to interpret the projections for growth, employment, and inflation. Early last summer, Chairman Bernanke asked Governor Yellen, Governor Raskin, President Evans, and me to serve on a communications subcommittee. In January, the FOMC adopted two initiatives brought forward by the subcommittee. Both initiatives are important steps forward for the FOMC and are intended to serve the Committee and the public over the longer term. The first concerned improving our communications about FOMC participants’ economic projections in the SEP. So starting with our last meeting, the expanded SEP now contains information about policymakers’ assumed path for monetary policy, along with the projections for growth, unemployment, and inflation. It is important to keep in mind that the Fed’s SEP projections differ from those of private‐sector forecasters. Private‐sector forecasters explicitly or implicitly try to predict what the Fed’s next move will be. In the SEP, each policymaker assumes a path for monetary policy that – based on current economic conditions – he or she believes will deliver the best outcomes for the economy. Providing policy projections in the SEP helps the public to interpret the economic forecasts included in the SEP. For example, FOMC participants might have considerably different growth forecasts. Is it because they have different views about the underlying dynamics of the economy? Or is it because they are assuming different policy paths? Alternatively, two participants may have similar forecasts – say, the same inflation forecast – but they may believe that these forecasts will be achieved through different 8 policy paths. The expanded SEP will now show the range of views about the assumed policy paths that give rise to the projections. Of course, over time, policymakers’ views will evolve as the economy evolves. So, the expanded SEP will add an important perspective not just of prospective policy at a point in time, but of how the policy projections are influenced as economic conditions change. I would argue that adding policymakers’ assumptions to the SEP conveys more useful information about the likely future path of monetary policy than using a calendar date as we have been doing. It has two main advantages in my view. First, it illustrates the full range of views and, in doing so, underlines the uncertainty that truly exists about future policy. Second, over time it will reveal more information about the reaction function of policymakers’ views of policy to the evolution of economic conditions, which are, after all, the ultimate drivers of policy decisions. Such communication will prove useful not only in periods such as the current unusual circumstances but in more normal times as well. The second important communications initiative adopted by the FOMC in January was to issue a consensus statement of the longer‐run goals and policy strategy. When households, firms, and markets have a better understanding of what to expect from monetary policy, they can make better financial plans and spending decisions. Thus, greater clarity helps monetary policy become more effective at promoting its congressionally mandated goals of price stability, maximum employment, and moderate long‐term interest rates. The consensus statement does three very important things never before undertaken by the Federal Reserve. First, the FOMC explicitly states its goal for inflation as 2 percent, as measured by the year‐over‐year change in the overall personal consumption expenditures (PCE) chain‐weighted price index. Being explicit about our inflation objective will enhance the credibility of our commitment to price stability, which will help anchor inflation expectations and foster price stability and moderate long‐term 9 interest rates. Moreover, a credible commitment to price stability affords the Fed more flexibility in the short run as it attempts to mitigate the fluctuations in output and employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. Second, the statement explains why the FOMC cannot set a fixed long‐run numerical objective for the employment part of our mandate. This is not because we do not seek maximum employment or because we want to disregard or downplay its importance. Rather, it reflects the differences between the economic determinants of the inflation and employment parts of our mandate. Over the longer run, the economy’s inflation rate is primarily determined by monetary policy. So, the FOMC is able to set a longer‐ run numerical goal for inflation and should be held accountable for achieving that goal. On the other hand, maximum employment is largely determined by factors that are beyond the direct control of monetary policy. These factors include such things as demographics, technological innovation, the structure of the labor market, and various governmental policies – all of which will vary over time. Policymakers consider a wide range of indicators in assessing employment, but estimates of maximum employment at any point in time are subject to substantial uncertainty. The FOMC cannot set a fixed numerical objective for something that it does not directly control and cannot accurately measure. A third element of the consensus statement is that it makes clear that the FOMC takes a balanced approach to setting policy. By balanced approach I mean one that promotes all of our congressionally mandated objectives of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long‐term interest rates and does not favor one over the other. The consensus statement does not provide answers for all the hard policy choices. How best to implement this balanced approach takes a lot of judgment and may well differ across policymakers who may have different models of the economy even as they work to promote the same long‐term goals for monetary policy. 10 Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth to gradually accelerate to around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the unemployment rate falling gradually over time. I believe inflation expectations will be relatively stable and inflation will moderate in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy, the inflation situation is one that bears careful watching in order to ensure that inflation pressures remain contained over the medium run. On monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has taken bold and significant steps to improve the transparency of its policy actions and to create better public understanding of the rationale behind the FOMC’s decisions. Specifically, the FOMC now includes information about each participant’s assessments for the target federal funds rate path in its Summary of Economic Projections. The FOMC has also clarified its longer‐run goals and monetary policy decision‐making process and clearly articulated its inflation objective. Economic research over the past 30 years has shown that setting monetary policy in a systematic manner leads to better economic outcomes — lower and less volatile inflation and greater economic stability in general. But the benefit depends on the public’s understanding of the policymaking framework. Transparency not only furthers the effectiveness of monetary policy by enhancing the credibility of the central bank but also raises the Fed’s accountability to the public. Thus, I remain committed to working to increase the clarity of the Fed’s public communications about current economic conditions, the economic outlook, and our policymaking framework.

The Outlook and the Hazards of Accelerationist Policy Economic Forecast The University of Delaware Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship Newark, Delaware February 14, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 The Outlook and the Hazards of Accelerationist Policy Economic Forecast The University of Delaware Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship Newark, Delaware February 14, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Thank you for inviting me back again to the University of Delaware. It has been three years since I last spoke at this event and a lot has happened. Yet, as I will explain, we have come a long way on the road to recovery from the Great Recession. So, this morning I will share with you my take on the economic outlook. Then I want to discuss the hazards of trying to apply ever more monetary accommodation to speed up the recovery process. 1 Economic Outlook We are now in the third year of a moderate economic recovery that has had more than a few bumps along the way. We finished 2011 with real GDP at 1.6 percent, compared to 3.1 percent in the prior year. Some of this weakness is perfectly understandable, given the unexpected shocks we experienced during the year. Yet, the economy persevered. Indeed, growth accelerated across each of the four quarters, from less than half of a percent in the first quarter to around 2-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter. I 1 I should note the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 anticipate that we will continue to see moderate growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013, which is slightly above trend. Business spending, especially investment in equipment and software, was relatively healthy last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. In January, the Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey showed that regional manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, the fourth consecutive monthly increase since a late summer lull. The survey’s measures of future activity also indicated that our respondents expect activity to continue to pick up over the next six months. I take this as a sign that business sentiment is also improving. On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization but not much improvement in 2012. We entered the Great Recession over-invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to see a housing recovery until the surplus inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. Even as the economy rebalances, we should not seek, nor should we expect, housing and related sectors to return to those pre-recession highs. Those highs were unsustainable, and the housing crash that ensued destroyed a great deal of wealth for consumers and the economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals and many businesses. Moreover, monetary policy cannot paper over these losses, nor should it try to do so. Households and businesses, nevertheless, continue to make progress on restoring the health of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. Most economists, including me, believe that this process will continue into 2012. The labor market has grown stronger in recent months. Although there are still too many people unemployed in our region and the nation, I am encouraged by the most recent employment reports. The January employment report showed a net gain of 243,000 jobs, and revisions to November and December added another 60,000 jobs to the recovery. Some have downplayed the report, suggesting that one good data point 3 does not make a trend, and I wholeheartedly agree. But what we have seen is more than one data point. Net employment gains were 103,000 in October, 157,000 in November, 203,000 in December, and 243,000 in January – a clear positive trend. The household survey also reported a significant decline in the unemployment rate. Here, too, the trend is encouraging – 8.9 percent in October, 8.7 in November, 8.5 in December, and 8.3 in January. That is the lowest level in nearly three years. As growth continues and strengthens, I expect further gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling to 8 percent or less, by the end of 2012. In our District, all three states ended 2011 with lower unemployment rates. New Jersey’s rate, at about 9 percent, is still higher than the national average, but Delaware’s and Pennsylvania’s were below the national average, with rates of 7.4 and 7.6 percent, respectively. As we continue down the road to recovery, I expect we will face further hiccups along the way. One significant risk is the potential effects of the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. The economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely restrain U.S. exports. And while strains in financial markets have been limited to European institutions so far, we must continue to monitor events to ensure that there are no adverse spillovers to U.S. financial institutions. Of course, regardless of how the European situation plays out, it has already imposed considerable uncertainty on growth prospects for the global economy. Moreover, our own nation’s inability to establish a clear plan to put our fiscal house in order contributes additional uncertainty to the economic landscape. Until the economic environment becomes clearer, firms and consumers are likely to postpone significant spending and hiring decisions – imposing a drag on the recovery, even though economic developments in the U.S. continue to improve. Inflation risks in the near term remain modest. However, I remain concerned that monetary policy has exposed us to substantial inflation risk over the medium to longer 4 term. Total inflation in 2011, as measured by the consumer price index on a year-over- year basis, was 3 percent, reflecting strong increases in energy and food prices, particularly in the early part of the year. The personal consumption expenditures price index rose 2.4 percent. While these inflation rates exceed our target, I anticipate that with many commodity prices now leveling off or falling, and inflation expectations relatively stable, inflation will remain moderate in the near term. My forecast is that inflation will settle around 2 percent in 2012. Yet, inflation often develops gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often thought to prevent inflation from rising. But that did not turn out to be true in the 1970s. Thus, we need to proceed with caution and be circumspect as to the degree of monetary accommodation we supply to the economy. So let me review some of the policy actions the Fed has taken. Monetary Policy As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to support the recovery. We have also conducted two rounds of asset purchases that have more than tripled the size of the balance sheet and changed its composition from short-term Treasuries to longer-term Treasuries and housing-related securities, mostly mortgage-backed securities. Today, we are in a modest recovery from a deep recession and financial crisis. The financial crisis has passed, however, and monetary policy should not continue to act as if the crisis was still with us. In January, the Federal Open Market Committee announced that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014” – that’s almost three years from now. And that is 18 months longer than the mid-2013 calendar date first signaled last August. In addition, the Committee announced that the Fed intends to continue the maturity extension program, or “operation twist,” first launched last September. In this program, the Fed is buying $400 5 billion of longer-term Treasuries and selling an equal amount of shorter-term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce yields from already historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September because it was not clear to me that further monetary policy accommodation was appropriate. After all, inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year. In addition, I do not support the practice of offering forward policy guidance by saying economic conditions are likely to lead to low rates through some calendar date. Such statements are, in my mind, particularly problematic from a communications perspective. Monetary policy should be contingent on the economic environment and not on the calendar. Thus, I was not supportive of the Committee’s actions in January. I think that economic conditions, as they have evolved since late last year, do not call for further accommodation. In fact, the economy has actually improved. Moreover, I continue to oppose using calendar dates to communicate forward guidance. Yet, despite the extraordinary steps taken to support the economy, many argue that monetary policy should do more. The argument is that while inflation may be close to our target, unemployment remains elevated, and thus, monetary policy must act more aggressively if it is to meet its mandated employment objective. I disagree and believe that doing so would lead us down a very treacherous path – one that would be ever more difficult to navigate and one that would increase the already substantial risk of higher inflation. But the problem is not just inflation risk down the road. Prolonged efforts to hold interest rates near zero can lead to financial market distortions and the misallocation of resources. 6 Let me offer an analogy that might help you visualize the risks. Imagine you’re driving a car down the Delaware Turnpike on a rainy and foggy day on the way to a birthday party for your mother. Unfortunately, you can’t see very far ahead because of the weather, and you don’t know exactly how far you are from the exit. You are anxious because you don’t want to miss the party. Your children are in the back seat, giddy with excitement about seeing their grandmother. So you decide to go a little faster. You accelerate. After some time passes, you still think you are some distance from your exit. The children are now fidgeting in the back seat, and you don’t want to be late, so you decide to step on the gas a little more. Now, you are speeding, hoping to get to your destination sooner. Eventually, though, as you are flying down the highway, you finally catch a glimpse of the exit through the fog and rain, only now you are going too fast to safely navigate the off ramp. You are faced with two very unattractive options. One option is to slam on the brakes to make the exit. This strategy risks causing a multicar accident, as your abrupt efforts to slow down surprises drivers behind you who had expected you to continue at high speed. The result is an accident, perhaps injuries to innocent people, and maybe a severe traffic jam, diverting or delaying many others. The second option is to continue down the road to the next exit, turn around, and then backtrack to the right exit. This strategy means that you are late, you miss the party, you disappoint everyone, you pay extra for tolls and gas, and you incur numerous other costs in the process. Monetary policy is sometimes criticized for such “go-stop” policies. Policymakers step on the accelerator aggressively, only to slam on the brakes in order to change course. Such an approach to policy can be highly destabilizing, creating added volatility for financial markets and the economy. I would add that constant acceleration only makes these risks even more hazardous. Slamming on the brakes or abruptly changing course could disrupt the economy. Failing 7 to slow down and exit at the right time risks excessive inflation, which then has to be controlled. It also risks the misallocation of resources and capital, and perhaps even credit bubbles or other distortions that could pose problems for the economy. Thus, in my mind, such an accelerationist approach to monetary policy is risky and the potential costs may be quite high. It is an approach most often driven by an excessive focus on the short run and perhaps some hubris that we will be able to successfully avert the risks such a strategy poses for the economy over the longer run. Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the unemployment rate falling gradually over time. I believe inflation expectations will be relatively stable and inflation will moderate in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy, we must guard against the medium- and longer-term risks of inflation and the potential for distortions such accommodation can create. Finally, I believe we must also guard against an accelerationist approach to policy – one that calls for monetary policy to do more and more in an attempt to get to our objectives that much faster. The risks to economic stability of such an approach over the medium term could be quite high and could jeopardize our ability to achieve our longer-terms goals.

Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries U.S. Monetary Policy Forum The Initiative on Global Markets University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, New York February 24, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries U.S. Monetary Policy Forum The Initiative on Global Markets University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, New York February 24, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction I am pleased to participate in this important forum once again. I am particularly delighted to be a part of such a distinguished panel. This conference has rapidly become one of the premier venues for serious discussions of monetary policy and I am honored to be a part of it. Fiscal Imbalances During the past year, we have witnessed the ongoing saga of governments, both in Europe and in the U.S., struggling with large deficits and soaring public debt. For the most part, these challenges are self‐ inflicted. They are the result of governments choosing fiscal policies that they knew would be unsustainable in the long run. Financial market participants remain skeptical about whether the political process can come to grips with the problems. So far, this skepticism appears to be wholly justified. Neither the European nor the American political process has developed credible and sustainable plans to finance public spending. Instead, politicians continue to engage in protracted debates over who will bear the burden of the substantial adjustments needed to put fiscal policies back on a sustainable path. In my view, these prolonged debates impede economic growth, in part, due to the uncertainty they impose on consumers and businesses. Moreover, the longer the delay in developing credible plans, the more costly it becomes for the respective economies. Given the magnitude of the fiscal shortfalls, the way in which the political process restores fiscal discipline will have profound implications for years to come. Will there be higher taxes on investments by the private sector that risk reducing productive capacity and output in the future? Will there be 2 higher taxes on labor that discourage work effort or hiring? Will there be cutbacks in government expenditures on defense or basic research that might force significant resource reallocations and affect a wide array of industry sectors? Will there be cutbacks on entitlements that could affect health care, social insurance, and other aspects of our safety net? Or will a viable fiscal plan combine various types of tax increases and spending cuts? These are important questions that involve hard choices and trade‐offs between efficiency and equity. Yet, until fiscal authorities choose a path, uncertainty encourages firms to defer hiring and investment decisions and complicates the financial planning of individuals and businesses. The longer it takes to reach a resolution on a credible, sustainable plan to reduce future deficits and limit the ratio of public debt to gross domestic product, or GDP, the more damage is done to the economy in the near term. Some observers say cyclical factors and the magnitude of the recent global recession caused the current fiscal crisis. It is certainly true that the policy choices made by governments to deal with the financial crisis and ensuing recession have caused a significant deterioration in fiscal balances and debt levels in many countries. However, the underlying trends that are at the root of unsustainable fiscal deficits in many countries, including the U.S., have been in place and known for some time. In the U.S., for example, the major long‐run drivers of the structural deficit at the federal level are entitlements such as health care and Social Security.1 Thus, even after cyclical effects play out, many countries will continue to have large structural budget deficits. In this sense, the financial crisis and recession have simply exacerbated the underlying problems and perhaps moved up the day of reckoning. In some cases, such as Greece, that day has come. In light of these realities, market participants have begun to question the solvency of governments and their ability to honor their sovereign debt obligations in the absence of deep structural reforms. In Europe, the doubts have greatly complicated the political problems as various countries debate the question of “who pays” for the anticipated bad debts of individual countries. Here, too, the protracted nature of the political debate creates uncertainty, which undermines economic growth and exacerbates the crisis. While some have argued that preventing Greek default would keep the crisis from spreading, that argument has proven false. 1 In other countries and jurisdictions, such as the state and local level, pension and entitlement commitments also account for a significant source of the growth in commitments and thus are central to the fiscal problems. 3 The Interaction of Monetary Policy and Fiscal Policy The fiscal challenges alone are daunting. Yet, they can also have profound implications for monetary policy and the role of central banks. Today, I want to focus my remarks on that interaction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Of course, the appropriate relationship between the two is not a new topic. Yet, it has taken on new relevance and importance as a result of the recent crisis and the actions undertaken by policymakers. Let me elaborate. It is widely understood that governments can finance expenditures through taxation, debt, or printing money. In this sense, monetary and fiscal policy are intertwined through the government budget constraint. Nevertheless, there are good reasons to prefer an arrangement that provides a fair degree of separation between the functions and responsibilities of central banks and those of the fiscal authorities. For example, in a world of fiat currency, central banks are generally assigned the responsibility for establishing and maintaining the value or purchasing power of the nation’s monetary unit of account. Yet, that task can be undermined or completely subverted if fiscal authorities independently set their budgets in a manner that ultimately requires the central bank to finance government expenditures with significant amounts of seigniorage in lieu of tax revenues or debt.2 The ability of the central bank to maintain price stability can also be undermined when the central bank itself ventures into the realm of fiscal policy. Imagine a situation in which public debt levels are high and rising. Now stretch your mind even more and imagine that fiscal policymakers are reluctant to make the hard choices of cutting expenditures or increasing taxes. Of course, neither of these assumptions requires much imagination. Indeed, history and our daily newspapers provide numerous examples. Unless governments are constrained institutionally or constitutionally, they often resort to the printing press to try to escape their budget problems. Yet, we all understand that this option is a recipe for creating substantial inflation.3 Indeed, history shows that it is often a path toward hyperinflation.4 2 See Sargent and Wallace (1981). 3 Inflation, of course, is also a tax. It is a hidden tax on holding nominal assets, and when it is unanticipated, it can have significant consequences that redistribute wealth from creditors to debtors. The near‐term effects of money creation often appear to be positive, while the undesirable consequences only become apparent over time. While money creation results in lower nominal interest rates and perhaps a modest boost to real activity in the short run, over time, it results in higher inflation and higher nominal interest rates and ultimately requires painful efforts to restore price stability. 4 Some of the more notable examples include Germany, Hungary, and Austria after World War I. Hungary and Greece experienced hyperinflations after World War II. More recently, countries from South and Central America have had episodes of 4 Awareness of these long‐term consequences of excessive money creation is the reason that over the past 60 years, country after country has moved to establish and maintain independent central banks. Without the protections afforded by independence, the temptation of governments to exploit the printing press in the absence of fiscal discipline is just too great. Thus, it is simply good governance and wise economic policy to maintain a healthy separation between those responsible for tax and spending policy and those responsible for money creation. But it is equally important that independent central banks be constrained from using their own authority to engage in activities that enter the realm of fiscal policy or distort private markets.5 There are several ways to place limits on central banks so that the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy remain clear:6 First, the central bank can be given a narrow mandate, such as price stability. In fact, this has been a prominent trend during the last 25 years. Many major central banks now have price stability as their sole or primary mandate. Second, the central bank can be restricted as to the type of assets it can hold on its balance sheet. This limits its ability to engage in credit policies or resource allocations that rightfully belong under the purview of the fiscal authorities or the private marketplace. Third, the central bank can conduct its monetary policy in a more systematic or rule‐like manner, which limits the scope for discretionary actions that might violate the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. Milton Friedman’s famous k‐percent money growth rule is one example, as are Taylor‐type rules. Such approaches to systematic policy can be a commitment device that limits discretionary behavior and thus helps to solve time‐consistency problems. The Breakdown of the Accepted Boundaries Unfortunately, over the past few years, the combination of a financial crisis and sustained fiscal imbalances has led to a substantial breakdown in the institutional framework and the accepted barriers hyperinflation, including Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Peru, Mexico, and Nicaragua. Zimbabwe is the most recent example, and its hyperinflation episode ended with a currency reform in 2008. 5 See Plosser (2010) for further discussion on the risks of unconstrained policy tools and the necessity of commitment devices. 6 Sargent (2010) has a thoughtful and insightful discussion on these and related issues. 5 between monetary and fiscal policy. The pressure has come from both sides. Governments are pushing central banks to exceed their monetary boundaries and central banks are stepping into areas not previously viewed as acceptable for an independent central bank. Let me give you some examples. I will start with what I see as a not‐so‐subtle undermining of the commitment to price stability. Despite the well‐known benefits of maintaining stable prices, there are calls in both Europe and the U.S. to abandon this commitment and create higher inflation to devalue outstanding nominal government and private debt. Such an inflation tax would transfer wealth from those who have lent money, in good faith, to the borrowers. I am deeply skeptical of such a strategy. In my view, inflation is a blunt and inappropriate instrument for assigning winners and losers from profligate fiscal policy or excessive borrowing by private individuals and firms. Forced redistributions of this kind, if undertaken at all, should be done through the political process and by the fiscal authorities, not through the backdoor by the central bank by way of inflationist policies. As a monetary policymaker, I do not want to be complicit in such a strategy. Moreover, history has shown that once inflation is unleashed, it is not always easy to bring it back down, especially if the central bank loses the public’s confidence and damages the credibility of its commitment to price stability. Thus, proposals to use inflation to fix the debt overhang problem are nothing more than a call for debt monetization to solve a problem that is fundamentally fiscal in nature. Pressure on central banks is also showing up through other channels. In some circles, it has become fashionable to invoke “lender of last resort” arguments as a reason for central banks to engage in fiscal actions. This is a strained argument at best. The basic role of a lender of last resort is to provide liquidity to financial institutions that are solvent but facing temporary liquidity problems. Yet recently, some have used the concept to argue that the central bank should be the lender of last resort to governments. This is a perversion of one of central banking’s core concepts. It is a fig leaf to conceal the process of monetizing the sovereign debt of those countries that are insolvent due to their inability to manage their fiscal affairs. Monetary policy should not be used to solve a fiscal crisis. Unfortunately, from my perspective, breaching the boundaries is not confined to the fiscal authorities asking central banks to do their heavy lifting The Fed and other central banks have also undertaken actions that have blurred the distinction between monetary policy, credit policy, and fiscal policy. These steps were undertaken with the sincere belief that they were absolutely necessary to address the challenges posed by the financial crisis. 6 For example, the Fed established credit facilities to support particular asset classes, such as commercial paper and asset‐backed securities. In November 2008, the Fed announced it would begin purchasing housing agency mortgage‐backed securities and agency debt to increase the availability and reduce the cost of credit in the housing sector. When the Fed engages in targeted credit programs that seek to alter the allocation of credit across markets, I believe it is engaging in fiscal policy and has breached the traditional boundaries established between the fiscal authorities and the central bank. Indeed, some of these actions have generated pointed criticisms of the Fed. I view the breakdown of the traditional institutional arrangements as dangerous and fraught with longer‐term risks. While it is popular to view such blurring of the boundaries as appropriate “cooperation” or “coordination” between the monetary and fiscal authorities, the boundaries were established for good reasons and we ignore them at our own peril. Restoring the Boundaries Once a central bank ventures into fiscal policy, it is likely to find itself under increasing pressure from the private sector, financial markets, or the government to use its balance sheet to substitute for other fiscal decisions. Such actions by a central bank can create their own form of moral hazard, as markets and governments come to see central banks as instruments of fiscal policy, thus undermining incentives for fiscal discipline. This pressure can threaten the central bank’s independence in conducting monetary policy and thereby undermine monetary policy’s effectiveness in achieving its mandate. I have long argued for a bright line between monetary policy and fiscal policy, for the independence of the central bank, and for the central bank to have clear and transparent objectives. I have also stressed the importance of a systematic approach to monetary policy that serves to limit discretionary actions by the central bank. At this conference three years ago, I argued for a new accord between the Treasury and the central bank that would severely limit, if not eliminate, the ability of the central bank to lend to private individuals and firms outside of the discount window mechanisms.7 I argued that decisions to grant subsidies to particular market segments should rest with the fiscal authorities – in the U.S., this means the Congress and the Treasury Department – and not with the central bank. Thus, I proposed that the new accord limit the Fed to an all‐Treasuries portfolio, except for those assets held as collateral for traditional discount window operations. Should the fiscal authority ask the central bank to engage in 7 See Plosser (2009) and Plosser (2010). 7 lending outside of its normal operations, the fiscal authority should exchange government securities for the nongovernment assets that would accumulate on the central bank’s balance sheet as a result. This type of swap would ensure that the full authority and responsibility for fiscal matters remained with the Treasury and Congress and the Fed’s balance sheet remained essentially all Treasuries. Congress has mandated the goals of monetary policy to promote price stability, maximum employment, and moderate long‐term interest rates. Asking monetary policy to take on ever more fiscal responsibilities undermines the discipline of the fiscal authorities and the independence of the central bank. Central banks and monetary policy are not and cannot be real solutions to the unsustainable fiscal paths many countries currently face. The only real answer rests with the fiscal authorities’ ability to develop credible commitments to sustainable fiscal paths. It is a difficult and painful task to be sure, but a monetary solution is a bridge to nowhere at best, and the road to perdition at worst – a world of rising and costly inflation and a weakening of fiscal discipline. References Plosser, Charles I., “Credible Commitments and Monetary Policy After the Crisis,” speech presented at the Swiss National Bank Monetary Policy Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 24, 2010. Plosser, Charles I., “Ensuring Sound Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of Crisis,” speech presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum: The Initiative on Global Markets, New York City, February 27, 2009. Sargent, Thomas, “Where to Draw Lines: Stability versus Efficiency,” New York University Working Paper (September 6, 2010). Sargent, Thomas, and Neil Wallace, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (Fall 1981), pp. 1–17.

A Progress Report on Our Monetary Policy Framework Forecasters Club New York, New York February 29, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 A Progress Report on Our Monetary Policy Framework Forecasters Club New York, New York February 29, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction I am pleased to be here today, and I will do my best to avoid all the hackneyed forecaster jokes. I am sure you have heard them all anyway. I will simply note that I have often said that forecasting can be a humbling experience in the best of times but I have learned some lessons along the way. For example, one Thursday morning not long ago, a reporter asked me what I thought the monthly employment numbers would show when they were released the next day. I responded that I had been around long enough to learn never to predict anything about which I can be proven right or wrong within a week and certainly not within 24 hours. It simply doesn’t pay. So, in lieu of a typical forecasting speech today, I would like to discuss the recent steps taken by the Federal Reserve to improve the transparency of monetary policy. These important initiatives are intended to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy as well as the accountability of our central bank. Over the last few years, I have spoken frequently about the need to improve transparency and to bring our monetary policy framework into the 21st century.1 In my view, there are four interrelated dimensions to a stronger monetary policy framework. The first is to ensure that the central bank commits to a set of clearly articulated objectives that can be feasibly achieved by monetary policy. The second element requires the central bank to be transparent and clear in its communications. The third element, related to the second, is for the central bank to conduct monetary policy in a systematic or 1 See Plosser (2010) and (2011), among others. As always, these views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 rule‐like manner.2 The fourth element, and arguably the most important, is for the central bank to set monetary policy independently from the fiscal authorities. As many of you know, last year Chairman Bernanke asked Governor Yellen, Governor Raskin, Chicago Fed President Evans, and me to serve on a subcommittee whose task was to develop recommendations to improve the Federal Open Market Committee’s communications. In January, the FOMC adopted two initiatives brought forward by the subcommittee. I want to review these initiatives today and how they relate to my broader views on a stronger monetary policy framework. Of course, improving policy transparency will always be a work in progress. So, I will also talk about additional steps I believe we could take to further improve our framework for conducting policy. Statement of Principles The first communications initiative adopted by the FOMC was to issue a consensus statement of principles about its long‐run policy goals and objectives. The statement makes four very significant points in clarifying our policy objectives. First, the statement reaffirms the Committee’s commitment to its congressional mandate to promote “maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long‐term interest rates.” More important, the statement gives texture to those objectives in a way never before articulated. In particular, the statement’s second significant point stresses that inflation over the longer run is mainly determined by monetary policy. In this sense, the FOMC acknowledges what every economist has known for over two centuries: inflation is a monetary phenomenon. Therefore, it is both appropriate and feasible for the monetary authority to set an inflation goal and be held accountable for achieving it. The Committee, therefore, adopted a long‐term inflation goal of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures. By establishing an explicit inflation target, the Federal Reserve is adopting a practice used by most major central banks around the world and one that is acknowledged as a best practice by academics and central bankers. 2 See Dotsey and Plosser (2012) and Plosser (2008). 3 A third important point made in the statement is that it is not appropriate for the central bank to set an explicit numerical goal for the maximum employment part of our mandate. Maximum employment is mainly determined by nonmonetary factors, such as demographics, technological change and productivity, the structure of the labor market, and governmental policies – for example, minimum wage laws, unemployment benefits, retirement incentives, and taxes. Since these factors change over time, the concept of maximum employment can also change over time. While policymakers consider a wide range of indicators to assess employment, the value of such indicators is subject to considerable uncertainty. Economists, for example, can, and often do, have very different assessments of what the level of maximum employment is at any point in time. This arises because different models suggest different conceptual definitions, most of which are not directly observable. So, monetary policy should not seek to achieve an explicit objective for something it does not directly control and cannot accurately measure. Fourth, the statement notes that, in general, price stability and maximum employment are complementary. Price stability promotes economic efficiency by giving individuals and businesses more confidence that the purchasing power of the dollar will not erode. Conversely, the failure to maintain price stability can often lead to greater instability in employment and output. When inflation rises to unacceptable levels, as it did in the 1970s, monetary policy will be forced to react to restore price stability. This, in turn, could lead to increased instability in employment and output, as it did in the recession in the early 1980s. But the FOMC’s consensus statement of principles also acknowledges that in the short run, the maximum employment and price stability parts of the Fed’s mandate could be in conflict. In such circumstances, monetary policy will seek to follow a balanced approach in promoting its statutory mandate. The consensus statement does not provide answers for all the hard policy choices. How best to implement this balanced approach requires judgment and may well differ across policymakers who may have different models of the economy even as they work to promote the same long‐term goals for monetary policy. Improvements in the Summary of Economic Projections The second important step the Committee took in January toward increased transparency involved the economic projections that the FOMC releases four times a year. The Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP for short, summarizes the individual FOMC policymakers’ views on the economy as reflected in 4 several key economic variables, including output, inflation, and unemployment. Yet, these projections are not forecasts in the usual sense. Each policymaker’s projections are conditioned on the policymaker’s assessment of “appropriate policy,” that is, the policy path that he or she views as the most likely to yield the best outcomes for the economy in the absence of further shocks. This policy path isn’t necessarily the most likely path; instead, it is the path viewed as being the best policy. Thus, the projections should not be compared with the forecasts of private‐sector forecasters who try to predict what the Fed’s next move might be. Instead, each policymaker makes economic projections based on an assessment of the best policy path to achieve the most desirable outcomes. Until January, the SEP did not reveal any information about the appropriate paths assumed by the participants. This lack of information about the underlying policy assumptions made it difficult to know what the SEP represented. For example, two participants may be projecting the same long‐run inflation rate, but they may believe it will take very different policy paths to achieve that outcome. Other central banks, such as those of Norway, Sweden, and New Zealand, have provided information about the assumed path of policy. In January, the Fed joined them and began releasing information on the underlying policy paths assumed by the participants in their economic projections. These policy paths are summarized in two charts. The most important chart displays the level of the federal funds rate assumed by each participant at the end of each calendar year for three years out and for the longer run. This information provides a useful picture of the range of views of future policy assumed by policymakers. Note once again that these are assumptions, not forecasts in the usual sense. For example, I might submit a very different projection of inflation rates if I were asked to use someone else’s policy path or even the policy path implicitly assumed in the fed funds futures market. It is also important to emphasize that these policy assessments do not constitute a commitment to follow a particular path but will evolve as economic conditions evolve. In fact, I believe that changes in this chart over time will prove to be a far better way to provide information about the path of policy than using calendar dates, as we are currently doing in our FOMC statements. Policy should be conditioned on the state of the economy, not the calendar. Observers watching how these policy paths evolve as the economy improves are likely to learn more about the timing and magnitude of future policy actions. This then will reveal more about the policymakers’ reaction function, on which I will have more to say in a moment. 5 From my perspective, our actions in January were important steps forward. We clarified our goals and objectives, and we became more transparent about our views of future policy. More to Do Of course, as I mentioned at the outset, improving the transparency of our communications and strengthening our policy framework is a work in progress. More can be done. First, as a way to increase transparency, I believe the SEP should include more information about the linkages among the economic variables and the associated policy paths. Even with the recent improvements, the public cannot link a policy path to a particular set of projections for output, inflation, and unemployment in the SEP. That is only possible when individual policymakers choose to reveal such information in their speeches and other public communications. A natural next step would be to include a matrix of output, inflation, and unemployment, and the associated policy path assumptions that each policymaker submitted. This would make the information in the SEP easier to interpret and give a better sense of the linkage between changes in economic conditions and policy. Second, I believe the Federal Reserve should do a more comprehensive monetary policy report four times a year. Currently, the Chairman testifies before Congress twice a year – in fact, he is doing so today – and that testimony is accompanied by a written report. In addition, the Chairman holds press briefings four times a year to summarize the SEP. I think there is an opportunity to combine these efforts in a more comprehensive report on monetary policy. Most central banks that have adopted an inflation target have also sought to improve communication and transparency through the publication of a regular policy report. In the U.K., for example, the Bank of England issues a quarterly Inflation Report. Other countries produce a Monetary Policy Report that discusses the central bank’s forecasts and the longer‐term context of policy. These reports offer an opportunity to reinforce the underlying framework the central bank has adopted for the conduct of policy. I think the Fed should consider producing a similar report to elaborate and reinforce its policy framework and how it relates to economic conditions. These reports will help improve the public’s understanding of policy, which will help make policy more effective and the central bank more accountable. Third, I believe the FOMC should adopt clearer guidelines on how policy evolves with economic conditions. The better the public and the markets understand how policy is likely to be adjusted as the 6 economy changes, the more predictable policy becomes, which promotes price stability and better economic outcomes. The history of U.S. monetary policy is filled with stops and starts and changes in direction, yet the Fed has communicated little about what drives those decisions. Indeed, historically, central bankers have tended not to reveal such information, since they preferred discretionary policy over systematic policy. Of course, policymakers do not know with any degree of certainty how economic conditions will evolve. So they cannot and should not say with any certainty what policy will be in the future. But policymakers can provide information about the factors that will influence their policy decisions. Some call this a policy rule. Milton Friedman advocated a rule in the form of a k‐percent growth rate of the money supply. John Taylor devised a rule that depends on a measure of inflation relative to a target and some measure of resource utilization. Other versions of the Taylor rule involve a degree of smoothing to minimize sharp swings in the policy rate. A policy rule is also called a reaction function or response function because it describes how policy will evolve as key economic conditions evolve. I believe that the Fed should provide more information about its reaction function. The practice of using systematic rules as guides to monetary policy imposes an important discipline on policymaking and improves communication and transparency. This is because systematic rules make policy more predictable and therefore helps the public and markets make better decisions. Moreover, if policymakers choose to deviate from the guidelines, they are forced to explain why and how they anticipate returning to normal operating practices. Systematic policy also reduces the temptation to engage in discretionary policies. I believe the Committee is still some way from agreeing on one systematic policy rule or reaction function. Such choices will involve elaborate discussions and agreement on the appropriate class of models and an agreed‐upon loss function. One way to move toward more systematic policy would be to describe the variables that are important for our response function. The academic literature suggests using rules that respond aggressively to deviations of inflation from the central bank’s target and less aggressively to deviations of output from some concept of “potential output.” Research has found that such rules perform fairly well in a variety of models and frameworks.3 3 See Orphanides and Williams (2002). 7 Thus, it is reasonable and feasible for the Fed to describe policy in terms of the variables in a rule that is robust across models. We would not have to articulate a precise mathematical rule but would provide the key variables and then communicate policy decisions in terms of changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change based on how the variables in our response function have changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the public will have a greater ability to form judgments about the likely course of policy. This would reduce uncertainty about policy and promote stability. There is one more item on my list of things to do. At the beginning of my remarks, I stressed the importance of maintaining the independence of the central bank. That independence is now under attack. Last week, I gave a speech on the fraying boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy.4 I noted that while monetary policy and fiscal policy are intertwined through the government’s budget constraint, there are good reasons to maintain clear boundaries between the two. Specifically, in a world where fiscal discipline is lacking, governments without the institutional or constitutional guarantees of an independent central bank often resort to money creation as a solution to fiscal problems. This, of course, is a recipe for high rates of inflation and, in the extreme, hyperinflation. For this reason, countries throughout the world have moved over the last 60 years to strengthen the independence of their central banks. It is simply good governance to keep a healthy degree of separation between those responsible for tax and spending policies and those responsible for monetary creation. The pressure on independence stems, in part, from fiscal imbalances and the inability of governments to develop credible and sustainable plans to finance public expenditures. In turn, the pressure can manifest itself in calls for higher inflation or for central banks to act as lenders of last resort for failing governments. Yet central banks have also contributed to the breakdown of the boundaries by engaging in credit allocations to particular sectors, such as housing, and bailouts to particular firms, such as Bear Sterns. Thus, the fiscal authorities and supposedly independent central banks have acted in ways that undermine central bank independence. I believe this is a dangerous path and one that needs to be changed. We need to restore the boundaries. 4 See Plosser (2012). 8 Conclusions To summarize, the FOMC has taken significant actions toward greater transparency, most recently with the historic steps adopted in January. These steps in turn help to promote better public understanding of the rationale behind the FOMC’s decisions. First, we released a statement clarifying the long‐run goals of monetary policy and our policymaking strategy. Second, we began releasing information about the policy paths that underlie our economic projections. Yet, I believe there is more that can be done. We can and should provide more details about the interplay between economic conditions and policy. We can also better define our reaction function, to enable the public to better understand and anticipate future policy actions. Economic research has shown that increased transparency can improve the effectiveness of monetary policy, as well as the Fed’s accountability with the public. These benefits underscore the importance of our continued pursuit of finding better ways to communicate our framework for monetary policy decisions. 9 References Dotsey, Michael, and Charles I. Plosser. “Designing Monetary Rules in an Uncertain Economic Environment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review (First Quarter 2012). Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, "Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2002), pp. 63‐118. Plosser, Charles. “The Benefits of Systematic Monetary Policy,” speech to the National Association for Business Economics, Washington Economic Policy Conference, March 3, 2008. Plosser, Charles. “Credible Commitments and Monetary Policy After the Crisis,” speech to Swiss National Bank Monetary Policy Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 24, 2010. Plosser, Charles. “Strengthening Our Monetary Policy Framework Through Commitment, Credibility, and Communication,” speech to Global Interdependence Center’s 2011 Global Citizen Award Luncheon, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, November 8, 2011. Plosser, Charles. “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries,” speech to U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 24, 2012.

Restoring Central Banks After the Crisis Re-Examining Central Bank Orthodoxy for Unorthodox Times: Inaugural Meeting of the Global Society of Fellows of the Global Interdependence Center Banque de France Paris, France March 26, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Restoring Central Banks After the Crisis Re-Examining Central Bank Orthodoxy for Unorthodox Times: Inaugural Meeting of the Global Society of Fellows of the Global Interdependence Center Banque de France Paris, France March 26, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction I am delighted to be here today in this beautiful city and to have the honor to serve on such a distinguished panel with friends and colleagues. David Kotok has been the guiding force behind the GIC conferences over the past several years. He and his team at the GIC never fail to gather an interesting and knowledgeable group of people to discuss important topics on truly global issues. So, I want to thank him and the GIC for their efforts and contributions. I also want to thank our hosts, Christian Noyer and the Banque de France. I am going to take a little different tack on the subject matter of this gathering. Rather than focus on what new orthodoxy we should take away from the financial crisis, I want to argue that we need to restore some of the old orthodoxy. David did suggest that he wanted to have a conversation on important issues, so I intend to be somewhat provocative in an effort to stimulate such conversation. As usual, I want to stress that my views are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I will focus my remarks on two related topics that have emerged as a consequence of the crisis. The first is the relation between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The second topic involves the role of a central bank’s balance sheet as a policy tool. These are issues that I believe are of fundamental importance to the role of central banks in our economies. The Relationship Between Monetary and Fiscal Policies Let me begin by sharing some thoughts on the appropriate relationship between monetary and fiscal policies. In the wake of the financial crisis and the ensuing recession, many countries around the world responded with a significant increase in government spending. Some of this increase came about through what economists call automatic stabilizers. But there has also been a dramatic expansion in budget deficits attributable to deliberate efforts to apply fiscal stimulus to improve economic outcomes. This expansion in government spending has been very significant in the U.S., but it has also occurred in other countries. So what does this have to do with monetary policy? Well, it turns out, a great deal. It is widely understood that governments can finance expenditures through taxation, debt — that is, 2 future taxes — or printing money. In this sense, monetary policy and fiscal policy are intertwined through the government budget constraint. For good reasons, though, societies have converged toward arrangements that provide a fair degree of separation between the functions of central banks and those of their fiscal authorities. For example, in a world of fiat currency, central banks are generally assigned the responsibility for establishing and maintaining the value or purchasing power of the nation’s unit of account. Yet, that task can be undermined, or completely subverted, if fiscal authorities set their budgets in a manner that ultimately requires the central bank to finance government expenditures with significant amounts of seigniorage in lieu of current or future tax revenue. ∗ The ability of a central bank to maintain price stability can also be undermined when the central bank itself ventures into the realm of fiscal policy. History teaches us that unless governments are constrained institutionally or constitutionally, they often resort to the printing press to try to escape what appear to be intractable budget problems. And the budget problems faced by many governments today are, indeed, challenging. But history also teaches us that resorting to the printing press in lieu of making tough fiscal choices is a recipe for creating substantial inflation and, in some cases, hyperinflation. Awareness of these long-term consequences of excessive money creation is the reason that over the past 60 years, country after country has moved to establish and maintain independent central banks — that is, central banks that have the ability to make monetary policy decisions free from short-run political interference. Without the protections afforded by independence, the temptation of governments to exploit the printing press to avoid fiscal discipline is often just too great. Thus, it is simply good governance and wise economic policy to maintain a healthy separation between those responsible for tax and spending policy and those responsible for money creation. It is equally important for central banks that have been granted independence to be constrained from using their own authority to engage in activities that more appropriately belong to the fiscal authorities or the private sector. In other words, with independence comes responsibility and accountability. Central banks that breach their boundaries risk their legitimacy, credibility, and ultimately, their independence. Given the benefits of central bank independence, that could prove costly to society in the long run. There are a number of approaches to placing limits on independent central banks so that the boundaries between monetary policy and fiscal policy remain clear. First, the central bank can be given a narrow mandate, such as price stability. In fact, this has been a prominent trend during the last 25 years. Many major central banks now have price stability as their sole or primary mandate. Second, the central bank can be restricted as to the type of assets it can hold on its balance sheet. This limits its ability to engage in credit policies or resource allocations that rightfully belong under the purview of the fiscal authorities or the private marketplace. ∗ See Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (Fall 1981), pp 1-17. 3 And third, the central bank can conduct monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner, which limits the scope of discretionary actions that might cross the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies. Milton Friedman’s famous k-percent money growth rule is one example, as are Taylor-type rules for the setting of the interest rate instrument. Unfortunately, over the past few years, the combination of a financial crisis and sustained fiscal imbalances has led to a breakdown in the institutional framework and the previously accepted barriers between monetary and fiscal policies. The pressure has come from both sides. Governments are pushing central banks to exceed their monetary boundaries, and central banks are stepping into areas not previously viewed as appropriate for an independent central bank. Let me offer a couple of examples to illustrate these pressures. First, despite the well-known benefits of price stability, there are calls in many countries to abandon this commitment and create higher inflation to devalue outstanding nominal government and private debt. That is, some suggest that we should attempt to use inflation to solve the debt overhang problem. Such policies are intended to redistribute losses on nominal debt from the borrowers to the lenders. Using inflation as a backdoor to such fiscal choices is bad policy, in my view. Pressure on central banks is also showing up through other channels. In some circles, it has become fashionable to invoke lender-of-last-resort arguments as a rationale for central banks to lend to “insolvent” organizations, either failing businesses or, in some cases, failing governments. Such arguments go beyond the well-accepted principles established by Walter Bagehot, who wrote in his 1873 classic Lombard Street that central bankers could limit systemic risk in a banking crisis by “lending freely at a penalty rate against good collateral.” Central bankers have abandoned this basic Bagehot principle in the last few years but have not replaced it with a clear alternative. Indeed, actions were often confusing and unpredictable and lacked a coherent framework. I believe that central banks need to think hard about how and when they exercise this important role. We need to have a well-articulated and systematic approach to such actions. Otherwise, our actions will exacerbate moral hazard and encourage excessive risk-taking, thus sowing the seeds for the next crisis. Unfortunately, neither financial reform nor central banks have adequately addressed this dilemma. Breaching the boundaries is not confined to the fiscal authorities asking central banks to do their heavy lifting. The Fed and other central banks have undertaken other actions that have blurred the distinction between monetary policy and fiscal policy, such as adopting credit policies that favor some industries or asset classes relative to others. Such steps were taken with the sincere belief that they were absolutely necessary to address the challenges posed by the financial crisis. The clearest examples can be seen when the Federal Reserve established credit facilities to support markets for commercial paper and asset-backed securities. Most notable has been the effort by the Fed to support the housing market through its purchases of mortgage-backed securities. These credit allocations have not only breached the traditional boundaries between fiscal and monetary policy, they have generated pointed public criticisms of the Fed. Once a central bank ventures into fiscal policy, it is likely to find itself under increasing pressure from the private sector, financial markets, or the government to use its balance sheet to substitute for other fiscal decisions. Such actions by a central bank can create their own form of moral hazard, as markets and governments come to see central banks as instruments of fiscal policy, thus undermining incentives for 4 fiscal discipline. This pressure can threaten the central bank’s independence in conducting monetary policy and thereby undermine monetary policy’s effectiveness in achieving its mandate. In my view, this blurring of the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies is fraught with risks. As I said, these boundaries arose for good reason, and we ignore their breach at our peril. I believe we must seek ways to restore the boundaries. The Central Bank’s Balance-Sheet Policy Another related issue facing central banks arises from the degree to which central banks have expanded their balance sheets. There are two dimensions to this issue. One is the composition of the balance sheet. In the U.S., for example, the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve has changed from one made up almost entirely of short-term U.S. Treasury securities to one that is mostly long-term Treasuries, plus significant quantities of long-term mortgage-backed securities. This concentration of housing-related securities is problematic because it is a form of credit allocation and thus violates the monetary/fiscal policy boundaries I just mentioned. The second aspect is the overall size of the balance sheet. Many central banks expanded their balance sheets in an effort to ease monetary policy after their usual policy instrument – an interest rate — had reached the zero lower bound. Do central bankers anticipate that their balance sheets will shrink to more normal levels as they move away from the zero lower bound? Is it desirable to do so? Or should monetary policy now be seen as having another tool, even in normal times? Some have suggested that central banks adopt a regime in which the monetary policy rate is the interest rate on reserves rather than a market interest rate, such as the federal funds rate. This would then permit the central bank to manage its balance sheet separately from its monetary instrument, freeing it to respond to liquidity demands of the financial system without altering the stance of monetary policy. In principle, this would take pressure off central banks to shrink their balance sheets from the current high levels and simply rely on raising the interest rate on reserves to tighten monetary policy. The alternative is to return to a more traditional operating regime in which the central bank sets a target for a market interest rate, such as the federal funds rate in the U.S., above the interest rate on reserves. Implementing this regime would require a smaller balance sheet. I am very skeptical of an operating regime that gives central banks a new tool without boundaries or constraints. Without an understanding, or even a theory, as to how the balance sheet should or can be manipulated, we open the door to giving vast new discretionary abilities to our central banks. This violates the principle of drawing clear boundaries between monetary policy and fiscal policy. When markets or governments come to believe that a central bank can freely expand its balance sheet without directly impacting the stance of monetary policy, I believe that various political and private interests will come forward with a long list of good causes, or rescues, for which such funds could or should be used. Economic theory and practice teach us that monetary policy works best when it is clear about its objectives and systematic in its approach to achieving those objectives. Granting vast amounts of discretion to our central banks in the expectation that they can cure our economic ills or substitute for our lack of fiscal discipline is a dangerous road to follow. In June, the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Committee outlined some principles that would guide its exit from this period of extraordinary monetary accommodation. In my view, those principles 5 represented an important first step in the FOMC’s attempt to restore the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies. In particular, the FOMC clearly stated its desire to return to an operating environment in which the federal funds rate is the primary instrument of monetary policy. To achieve that objective, the Fed will have to shrink its balance sheet to a more normal level. I interpret this as saying that our balance sheet should not be viewed as a new independent instrument of monetary policy in normal times. The exit principles also indicated the Committee’s desire to return the Fed’s balance sheet to an all-Treasuries portfolio. This re-establishes the idea that the Fed should not use its balance sheet to actively engage in credit allocations. In other speeches, I have outlined a framework that I have termed a “new accord” between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. It would enable the central bank to act in emergencies when requested by the Treasury or the fiscal authorities, but it would be clear up front that any non-Treasury assets that accrued on the central bank’s balance sheet would be swapped for government securities within a specified period of time. This would ensure that fiscal policy decisions remain under the purview of the fiscal authorities, not the central bank. Summary To summarize, it is important for governments to maintain independent central banks so that they are better able to achieve their mandates. It is also sound policy to limit the discretionary ability of central banks to engage in policies that fundamentally belong to fiscal authorities or private markets. Establishing and maintaining clear boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies protects the independence of the central bank and its ability to carry out its core mandate — maintaining price stability. Clear boundaries and resisting the use of the balance sheet as a new policy tool would also improve fiscal discipline by making it more difficult for the fiscal authorities to resort to the printing press as a solution to unsustainable budget policies.

Economic Outlook Rotary Club of Wilmington Wilmington, Delaware March 29, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Outlook Rotary Club of Wilmington Wilmington, Delaware March 29, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Thank you for inviting me to speak to the Rotary Club of Wilmington. In planning for today, I learned that Wilmington’s business and community leaders have been gathering under your auspices at this location since 1914, lon ger than any other Rotary Club in the world. From one organization that is almost a century old to another, that is quite an achievement. Since the Federal Reserve is nearing its centennial in December 2013, I thought I would give you a little background on our nation ’s central bank before I talk about my economic outlook. While many Americans hear about the Fed in the news every day, not everyone knows how we work or how we are structured. Congress created the Federal Reserve System in 1913. To balance political, economic, and geographic interests, the System was designed with 12 independently chart ered regional Reserve Banks throughout the country, overseen by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia serves the Third District, which includes Delaware, the southern half of New Jersey, and the eastern two‐thirds of Pennsylvania. The Reserve Banks distribute currency, ac t as a banker’s bank, and 2 generally perform the functions of a central bank, including serving as the federal government’s fiscal agent. A central bank also guides the country’s monetary policy. In the U.S., the body within the Federal Reserve that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. The Committee includes the seven members of the Board of Governors in Washington – there are currently two open pos ts – and five of the 12 Reserve Bank presidents: the president of the New York Fed and four other presidents, who serve one‐year terms on a rotating basis. This structure ensures that our national monetary policy has its roots not just in Washington or on Wall Street, but also on Main Street and across our diverse nation. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee's assessment of the economy and policy options. Each of us prepares for the meetings by gathering information throughout our Districts, around the nation, and, in some cases, internationally. This occurs through meetings with our boards of directors and advisory councils, conversations with local and international business leaders, as well as briefings on economic conditions by our Research staffs. All this helps contribute to a rich and comprehensive mosaic of the national economy. In this way, we are abl e to make the best informed decisions possible to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Specifically, Congress mandates that the Fed should conduct policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long‐term interest rates.” Since moderate long‐term interest rates generally result when prices are stable, it is often said that Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. I believe the diversity of opinion around the FOMC table is one of its great strengths and serves to improve the quality of our decision‐making. As the famous American 3 journalist Walter Lippmann once said, “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much.” But that diversity of views also requires me to note that I speak for myself and not the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic Outlook Now let me turn to the state of our economy. We have now seen 10 quarters of real GDP growth since mid 2009, when the Great Recession officially end ed. However, growth has not been particularly robust or smooth. To many, it occasionally feels like we take two steps forward only to take one step back. We finished 2011 with real GDP at 1.6 percent, compared to 3.1 per cent in the prior year. There were some perfectly understandable reasons for the weakness last year, given the unexpected shocks we experienced early in the year. Yet, the economy persevered. We saw growth accelerate across each of the four quarters, from less than half of a percent in the first quarter to 3 percent in the fourth quarter. I anticipate that we will continue to see moderate growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. That outlook puts me in a slightly more optimistic camp than some forecasters. For instance, the Philade lphia Fed’s first‐quarter Survey of Professional Forecasters reported average estimates of real GDP growing 2.3 percent in 2012 and 2.7 percent in 2013. Business spending, especially investment in equipment and software, remained relatively healthy last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. Results from the Philadelphia Fed’s monthly Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers, which are wide ly viewed as a useful barometer of national trends in manufacturing, have continued to improve since last summer’s lull. In March, regional manufacturers reported that their current activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, the sixth consecutive month of positive numbers. The survey’s indicators of general activity, new orders, shipments, and employment all remained positive. The survey’s measures of 4 future activity showed that our respondents expect activity to continue to pick up over the next six months. Consumer spending, which accounts for about 70 percent of the nation’s GDP, also continues to improve. While personal consumer expenditures were steady through January, retail sales in February grew 1.1 percent. While not exactly robust growth, retail sales are more than 6 percent higher than a year ago. On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization and maybe some slight improvement in 2012. We entered the Great Recession over‐invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to see a strong housing recovery until the surplus inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. Even as the economy rebalances, housing and related sectors are not likely to return to those pre‐recession highs, nor should we expect them to do so. Those highs were unsustainable, and the housing crash that ensued destroyed a great deal of wealth for consumers and the econ omy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals and many businesses. Moreover, monetary policy cannot paper over these losses, nor should it try to do so. Nevertheless, households and businesses continue to make progress on restoring the health of their balance sh eets by paying down debt and increasing savings. That is a healthy trend, and most economists, including me, believe that this trend will continue into 2012. On the labor front, I continue to be encouraged by recent employment reports, although everyone would agree that there are still too many people unemployed in our region and in the nation. The February employment report showed a net gain of 227,000 jobs, giving us the third month in a row with job growth of more than 200,000. We also continued to see a trend of upward revisions in prior months, adding another 60,000 jobs to payrolls. 5 The unemployment rate was 8.3 percent in February, as it was in January, but the unemployment rate has been moving down steadily for six months, and it is now at its lowest levels in three years. As growth continues and strengthens, I expect further gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling below 8 percent by the end of 2012. At the region al level, the latest unemployment rates for January also showed improvement. New Jersey’s rate, at about 9 percent, was still higher than the national average, but Delaware’s rate of 7.0 percent and Pennsylvania’s rate of 7.6 percent were below the national average. Our Research Department is forecasting no change in the unemployment rates for Pennsylvania and New Jersey and a decline in Delaware’s unemployment rate in February. The data are scheduled for release tomorrow. We are also seeing continued improvement in the employment index in our monthly survey of manufacturers, which sugg ests more employers are adding to payrolls than cutting back. As we continue down the road to recovery, there will undoubtedly be some bumps and setbacks along the way, but I am generally optimistic. Of course, any forecast is subject to some risks. The most significant and identifiable risk on the horizon is the potential effects of the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. In recent months, I have come to believe that the European governments and their economies will work through their challenges. Nonetheless, the economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely exert a small drag on U.S. exports. And while European financial ins titutions have so far endured through the financial market turmoil in Europe, we must continue to monitor events to ensure that these troubles do not spill over to U.S. financial institutions. Of course, regardless of how the European situation plays out, it has already imposed considerable unc ertainty on growth prospects for the global economy. Hopefully, some of that uncertainty is beginning to wane. Moreover, our own nation’s fiscal challenges contribute additional uncertainty to the economic landscape. 6 Until the economic environment becomes clearer, firms and consumers are likely to exercise some restraint in their spending and hiring decisions, thus limiting the pace of recovery, even while economic fundamentals in the U.S. continue to improve. On the inflation front, there are risks and we must monitor the trends with care. The rate of inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, was 2.9 percent for the 12 months through February. Another common measure called the personal consumption expenditures price index was 2.4 percent through January. Thus, inflation is higher than the Fed’s long‐term target of 2 percent. Some of the increased inflation over the past year was driven by sharp increases in energy prices. During the late summer, oil prices did decline somewhat, slowing price increases, but unfortunately, they have been rising again and crude oil prices are now over $100 a barrel and gasoline prices are rising. Oil prices have added a great deal of volatility to the overall price index. At times, sharp spikes in oil prices raise overall inflation, which is then revers ed when those prices increases moderate. Yet, since early 2009, when oil prices fell to about $60 a barrel, the trend has been upward. Moreover, inflation rates that remove the effects of energy and food have been drifting upward as well from their lows of 1 percent or less in late 2010 to about 2 percent or a little higher today, depending on the particular index. Thus, we must monitor these inflation trends with some care and be prepared to take appropriate actions as necessary. The public has the right to expect the central bank to keep inflation near its target of 2 percent over the medium to longer term. Inflation often develops gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often thought to prevent inflation from rising. But the lessons of the 1970s show that is not the case. As you may recall, we ended up with both high unemployment and high inflation, which became known as the misery index. That is not a place we want to find ourselves again. 7 Monetary Policy Before discussing where monetary policy might go in relation to economic conditions, it might be helpful to review just how much accommodation we currently have in place. As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to support the recovery. We have also conducted two rounds of asset purchases that have more than tripled the size of the Fed’s balance sheet and changed its composition from short‐term Treasu ries to longer‐term Treasuries and housing‐related securities, mostly mortgage‐backed securities. Many of these actions were taken at the height of the financial crisis and the ensuing deep recession. Yet, since then, as I have indicated, the economy has been healing, if somewhat more slowly than we would like, and the financial crisis has substantially abated. Of course, problems remain, but things are not nearly as bad or as gloomy as they were in 2009 and ear ly 2010. At its latest meeting in March, the Federal Open Market Committee continued to hold to its statement that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014.” That follows a structure for forward guidance that the Committee first began last August, when it said conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates through mid 2013. Then in January, it pushed back that calendar date another 18 months. The FOMC has also announced that the Fed intends to continue the maturity extension program, or “operation twist,” first launched last Septembe r and set to end in June. In this program, the Fed is buying $400 billion of longer‐term Treasuries and selling an equal amount of shorter‐term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce long‐term yields from already historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. 8 You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September, because it was not clear to me that further monetary policy accommodation was appropriate then. After all, inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year, as we have been discussing. Monetary policy should be responsive to economic conditions, and since that time, unemployment has decreased, and inflation is above target. I believe monetary accommodation is still called for, but I do not believe it should be as accommodative or aggressive as it was at the height of the crisis, when unemployment was over 10 percent and inflation was just 1 percent. Now that unemplo yment is at 8.3 percent and falling and inflation is over 2 percent and drifting up, we should not anticipate additional accommodation. Indeed, in the absence of some shock that derails the recovery, we may well need to raise rates before the end of 2014. Nevertheless , monetary policy should be responsive to economic conditions. In my view, current conditions do not warrant further accommodation. Yet, should economic conditions significantly deteriorate or the upside risks to inflation I have stressed fall and significant risk of deflation emerge, we should rethink our policy stance. But neither of these events seems likely to me at this juncture. I believe further accommodation at this stage of the business cycle could lead us down a very treacherous path – one that would be ever more difficult for us to navigate and one that would increase the already substantial risk of higher inflation. Yet, the problem is not just inflation risk down the road. Prolonged efforts to hold interest rates near zero can lead to financial market distortions and the misallocation of resources that could lead to more, not less, economic instability. 9 Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the unemployment rate falling gradually over time. I believe inflation expectations will be relative ly stable and inflation will remain at moderate levels in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy that has now been in place for more than three years, we must guard against the medium‐ and longer‐term risks of inflation and further distortions such accommodation can create. Monetary po licy should be determined by economic conditions and not by a calendar date. And we should resist any notion that we can solve all of our economic challenges simply by an ever more accommodative monetary policy.

Transparent Communications: The Journey Continues National Economists Club Washington, D.C. April 12, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Transparent Communications: The Journey Continues National Economists Club Washington, D.C. April 12, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction It is a pleasure to be here today. I am particularly pleased to join the list of distinguished speakers who have appeared before you over the years. Today, I would like to discuss the Federal Reserve’s journey to improve the clarity and transparency of its communications. Of course, it may seem obvious that all communications should be transparent – otherwise, you really aren’t communicating. However, it has taken central banks some time to appreciate the benefits of clear and transparent communications about monetary policymaking. Some observers think that monetary policy should remain a bit mysterious. They believe that efforts to communicate “too much” can backfire or result in confusion. Yet, this is most likely to be the case when communications lack clarity. Others seem to equate clear communications with providing a degree of omniscience about the future – omniscience that, of course, doesn’t really exist. Yet, central banks, including the Federal Reserve, have made important progress recently. Therefore, it seems like an opportune time to remind ourselves of the benefits of transparency in central banking. I will review some of the steps that the FOMC took in January toward increased transparency. Then I will suggest some additional 2 initiatives I believe would be beneficial. Of course, these are my views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the FOMC. Benefits of Transparency Over the last 30 years, economists have come to understand that expectations play an important role in the economy. Whether we think about labor markets, product markets, or financial markets, expectations affect the decisions made by households, businesses, and investors. Economic actors form expectations about a wide variety of things that affect their decisions, including tax policies, inflation, monetary policy, real economic growth, as well as other factors that may affect the supply and demand conditions that might prevail in various financial and product markets. Monetary policy can influence expectations and thus economic choices through a couple of important inter-related channels. First, monetary policy can affect the expected path of inflation. Uncertainty about this anticipated path can wreak havoc on financial plans and cause businesses and households to expend valuable resources to insulate their plans from unexpected and volatile movements in inflation. Thus, increased transparency about the central bank’s goals and objectives regarding inflation can improve economic efficiency and help anchor expectations of inflation. Second, long-term interest rates are important for many economic decisions and monetary policy can affect long-term interest rates through the expected path of a short-term rate, which is the standard instrument of monetary policy. Consequently, a better understanding of how policymakers will react to economic events over time can reduce uncertainty about the expected path of the short-term interest rate and so reduce the uncertainty and volatility of long-term rates. Reducing uncertainty about monetary policy, therefore, can help anchor expectations, improve the effectiveness of monetary policy, and reduce economic volatility. It also 3 improves economic efficiency by allowing households and businesses to make more informed decisions. Given these benefits, central banks have sought to improve transparency about the goals and objectives of monetary policy and how monetary decisions are made. Transparency has other benefits as well. For example, transparency enhances the central bank’s accountability and independence. Central bank independence is a fundamental tenet of sound central banking and leads to better economic outcomes. But independence must be accompanied by accountability. And accountability is more easily achieved when there is transparency. The public can best hold a central bank accountable when its goals are clearly stated and feasible. Assigning the central bank responsibility for things it cannot achieve or expecting the central bank to achieve a set of objectives that is too expansive makes it nearly impossible for the public to hold the central bank accountable. As the old expression goes, responsible for everything and accountable for nothing. Transparent and clear communications of monetary policy goals and a decision-making framework help ensure accountability and preserve central bank independence. Transparency can also enhance a central bank’s credibility. A central bank that is transparent will be less willing to make promises it cannot keep. When policy pronouncements are more credible, policy is more effective. Transparency can also make it easier to explain changes in policy without damaging the central bank’s credibility. We’ve Come a Long Way The Fed has been on a journey toward greater transparency for some time. But the pace of change has clearly accelerated under Chairman Bernanke. It may seem hard to believe, but it was not until 1994 that the FOMC began to publicly announce the policy 4 decisions made at the FOMC meetings. Up to then, the markets were left to infer the policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market. Prior to the 1990s, policymakers were concerned that giving the public more information about the rationale for policy decisions or even releasing the statement and directive given to the Open Market Trading Desk would lock policymakers into certain actions even if economic conditions changed. There was a strong desire to maintain flexibility. 1 Indeed, many of the arguments against transparency focused on the idea that it reduced the Committee’s discretion in setting policy. Yet, we now know that discretion is generally not optimal. Economic research in the past 30 years has shown that setting monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner leads to better economic outcomes – lower and less volatile inflation and greater economic stability in general.2 Such systematic policies are more predictable and thus allow for better decision-making by consumers and businesses. Since 1994, when the Fed began to announce changes in the federal funds rate target, it has taken a number of steps to improve the public’s understanding of policy decisions, including the most recent initiatives announced in January of this year. In 2000, the Fed began to release a statement after each meeting regardless of whether a policy action was taken. The statement included a description of the state of the economy and the rationale for the policy decision. It also offered an assessment of the risks to the economic outlook. Two years later, in 2002, the Fed began to release the votes of the individual members and the policy preferences of any dissenters in the post-meeting statement. 1 See Alan S. Binder, “Making Monetary Policy and Talking about It,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, D.C., March 9, 2007. 2 See Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp. 473-91. 5 In 2004, the Fed decided to speed up the release of the FOMC minutes after a three- week lag. After the appointment of Chairman Bernanke in 2006, the FOMC increased its efforts to communicate more clearly with the public. In 2007, the Fed started to produce quarterly economic projections of FOMC participants and expanded information regarding the heterogeneity of views. In 2009, the Fed expanded the projections to include participants’ assessments of the long-run tendencies of key economic variables. Then in 2011, the Chairman initiated a quarterly press conference coinciding with the release of the economic projections. Most recently, in January 2012, the Fed took two more steps on its march toward enhanced transparency. First, it issued a statement about monetary policy’s long-run goals and strategy, including an explicit target for inflation. It also began including information on the policy path assumptions underlying the FOMC participants’ economic projections. I will describe these two steps in greater detail, but I want to emphasize that this trend toward more central bank transparency has not been confined to the Fed. Different central banks have taken different approaches, in part, reflecting their diverse institutional structures. The now widely adopted practice of inflation targeting is only the first step. While inflation targeting establishes a clear goal, it lacks precise policy prescriptions for how to achieve that goal. In order to have policy decisions well- understood by the public, central banks with explicit inflation targets augment their 6 communications with inflation reports, press conferences, and speeches so that the public will better understand how policy will be conducted. Recent Steps to Enhance Transparency Let me now turn to the FOMC’s most recent initiatives to improve the clarity and transparency of our policy framework, beginning with the consensus statement of its long-term goals and strategy released in January. The statement made four important points. First, the Committee reaffirmed its commitment to its mandated goals of maximum employment, price stability, and moderate long-term interest rates. Second, the statement acknowledged what economists have known for over 200 years – that in the intermediate to longer run, inflation is a monetary phenomenon and thus determined by monetary policy. Therefore, it is appropriate for the Fed to set an explicit long-run target for inflation. The target selected was 2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the personal consumption expenditures chain-weighted price index. By being explicit about its numerical objective for price stability, the Fed enhances the credibility of its commitment to price stability. This helps anchor inflation expectations, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates. Another benefit of such an explicit objective is that it provides the public with a numerical metric by which it can, and should, hold the Fed accountable. Of course, articulating an inflation target is now a very common feature of what is viewed as best practice in central banking and is a key step in achieving the benefits of transparency. The third important feature of the statement explained why it is not appropriate for the Fed to establish a numerical objective for the maximum employment part of its mandate. This is not because the employment part of the mandate is less important, but because the economic determinants of employment are different from those of 7 inflation. Maximum employment is largely determined by factors that are beyond the control of monetary policy. These factors include such things as demographics, technological innovations, and numerous government policies, including tax policy, minimum wage laws, unemployment benefits, and the like. All of these factors can and do vary over time. Thus, the maximum level of employment will vary. It is also difficult to measure and not directly observable. Moreover, different economic models often lead to different conceptual views of how to define maximum employment. Therefore, it is inappropriate for the central bank to set a numerical objective for something it does not control and cannot measure with any degree of certainty. Finally, the statement pointed out that the goals of monetary policy are complementary over the longer run. Price stability promotes economic efficiency by giving households and businesses more confidence that the purchasing power of the dollar will not erode. This simplifies the decision-making of economic agents, allowing the economy to function more efficiently and more productively. Conversely, the failure to maintain price stability can often lead to greater instability in output and employment. However, in the short term, it is possible that the maximum employment and price stability parts of the Fed’s mandate could be in conflict. The statement makes clear that in such circumstances the Fed will pursue a balanced approach to promoting its objectives. Admittedly, this statement does not give much guidance as to how policy will be conducted, but I will have more to say on that in a few minutes. The second new communications initiative launched in January involved the Survey of Economic Projections, or SEP. As I mentioned earlier, these projections are reported four times a year and provide information about the range of individual policymakers’ assessments for key economic variables, including output, inflation, and unemployment. Each FOMC participant’s assessment is conditional on the policymakers’ assessment of “appropriate policy,” that is, the policy path most consistent with achieving the Fed’s 8 longer-term goals. Starting in January, the FOMC began releasing information on these assumed policy paths. This additional information has two benefits. First, having more information on the underlying policy paths should help the public better understand the projections. For example, they will have a better understanding of whether inflation is expected to return to the long-term goal as shocks work their way through the economy or whether policymakers anticipate that further monetary policy actions will be needed to achieve the Committee’s objective. Second, as views of appropriate policy evolve over time as economic and financial conditions change, the public will be able to draw better inferences about the relationship among current economic conditions, the economic outlook, and appropriate policy. Thus, over time, the public will gain a better understanding of how policy is likely to react in the future to changes in the economy. Further Steps The steps taken in January are important steps forward for the FOMC, but more can and should be done. As I noted in my discussion of the Committee’s longer-terms goals and objectives, the Committee’s description of how policy will be conducted is not entirely clear. Yet, we know that when monetary policy is conducted in a systematic way, it is more transparent and easier to communicate. By systematic policy, I mean policy that functions in a rule-like way. That is, there is a systematic relationship between changes in economic conditions and the policy actions and choices made by the central bank. I have already discussed some of the benefits of transparency, and a systematic approach to policymaking is a way of achieving greater transparency. The better the public and the markets understand how policy is likely to 9 be adjusted as the economy changes, the more predictable policy becomes, which promotes price stability and better economic outcomes. Of course, policymakers do not know with certainty how economic conditions will evolve. So they cannot and should not say with any certainty what policy will be in the future. But policymakers can provide information about the factors that will influence their policy decisions. Some call this a policy rule or reaction function. I believe that the Fed should provide more information about its reaction function and communicate its policy choices in terms of that reaction function. It is not just about transparency. The practice of using systematic rules as guides to monetary policy imposes an important discipline on policymaking as well as improving communications and transparency. For example, at times it may be important for policymakers to deviate from the guidelines. But then policymakers will be forced to explain why they deviated and when they anticipate returning to more normal operating practices. Requiring this type of transparency raises the bar that policymakers face to engage in discretionary policies in the first place. I suspect that the FOMC participants are not ready to agree on a specific policy rule or reaction function because they use different models and have different loss functions. However, there is reason to be optimistic since there is a growing literature on robust rules that work well in a range of models and reasonable loss functions. In the meantime, it does seem feasible that participants could agree on a set of economic variables to which monetary policy should react. The academic literature suggests using rules that respond aggressively to deviations of inflation from the central bank’s target and less aggressively to deviations of output from some concept of “potential output” or some alternative measure of resource utilization. 3 We would not have to specify the 3 See Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams, "Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2002), pp. 63-118. 10 precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change in terms of how the variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the public will form more accurate judgments about the likely course of policy – thereby reducing uncertainty and promoting stability. Finally, I think that the FOMC could improve communication and transparency by preparing a more comprehensive monetary policy report on a regular basis, perhaps quarterly. Currently, the Chairman testifies before Congress twice a year and submits an accompanying written report. In addition, the Chairman holds press briefings four times a year to summarize the SEP. I think there is an opportunity to combine these efforts into a more comprehensive report on monetary policy as many other countries do. The report would offer an opportunity to reinforce the underlying policy framework and how it relates to economic conditions in addition to summarizing the SEP. Conclusion To summarize, the FOMC is on a journey to improve the transparency of its monetary policy decision-making process. The benefits of transparency are now accepted by policymakers across the globe. Transparency not only improves the effectiveness of monetary policy, it also improves the central bank’s credibility and accountability with the public. The FOMC’s recent moves to publish guidelines on its longer-run goals and policy strategy and the policy assumptions that underlie FOMC projections are great strides toward this goal. However, transparency is a journey, and not a destination, and more can be done. In particular, I believe the FOMC should continue to work toward increasing the public’s understanding of how policy will react systematically to changes in economic conditions.
