-1- A Practitioner’s Perspective on the Productivity Slowdown Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Sandridge Lecture Virginia Association of Economists Richmond, Virginia April 4, 2019 Thank you for inviting me to join you this evening. It’s an honor to be here. While I’m quite certain I won’t coin a phrase as memorable or significant as, say, the “global saving glut,”1 I do hope you’ll find what I have to say interesting. I came to Richmond after a 30-year career at McKinsey in Atlanta, where in addition to management consulting I had many line roles, including serving as the CFO. I am deeply respectful and appreciative of the insights created in the field of economics and by my team at the Richmond Fed. Building on both, I hope to leverage my background to bring a unique perspective as a businessperson on topics such as pricing, the real drivers of wages, the impact of tariffs or tax cuts, and the causes and implications of slower productivity growth. The latter will be the subject of my talk this evening. You know why productivity growth matters. In an environment where demographic trends are contributing to slow growth in the labor force, productivity growth is essential for our economy to grow. Stronger growth would improve living standards. Stronger growth would create revenues to reduce the federal budget deficit at a time when it seems unlikely to be addressed -2- otherwise. But since 2006, average annual labor productivity growth has been just 1.3 percent. In contrast, it averaged 2.3 percent between 1985 and 2005. What’s changed? Before I try to answer that question, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.2 The Productivity Boom Let’s start by looking at the 1970s. At that time, general macroeconomic volatility—particularly rising and volatile inflation—created an environment that discouraged investing. In addition, because the market for corporate control was dormant, companies and CEOs faced limited performance pressure. CEOs were statesmen, as focused on their workforce and their communities as they were on their shareholders. And many leaders spent their entire careers at the same company, limiting the diffusion of best practices. We also had less foreign competition, strong unions and stricter regulations in many industries. All these factors contributed to average labor productivity growth of 1.6 percent between 1975 and 1985. I saw the corporate world change significantly during the 1980s and 1990s in ways that drove productivity growth. A strengthened market for corporate control brought about a fundamental change in focus. Investment banks and “corporate raiders” put companies on notice that they had to “perform or die.” Stock options became a much larger share of executive compensation, tying a CEO’s performance more closely to shareholder value.3 -3- Companies also faced more competition as global trade barriers were eliminated and industries were deregulated. And once inflation was finally tamed, firms had less pricing power and were forced to become more efficient in order to maintain their profit margins. The “big box” retail format also drove productivity growth, in large part because monopsonistic buyers could exert significant pressure on their suppliers to become more efficient themselves. Between 1995 and 2002, productivity growth in the retail sector averaged nearly 4 percent annually.4 Greater efficiency was made possible by a variety of new practices and new technologies, including strategic sourcing and outsourcing, re-engineering and lean management, information technology and internet distribution, to name a few. These practices and technologies spread to other companies more quickly via a more robust business press, greater talent mobility and—if I may say so—the growth of management consulting. The result was a productivity boom. The Productivity Slowdown Over the past decade or so, however, productivity growth has slowed considerably. As a businessperson, I find this hard to explain. During my consulting career, I worked for large companies in multiple industries on a range of productivity topics, including manufacturing efficiency, overhead reduction and process redesign. I didn’t observe any particular cliff around 2005. I saw management equally motivated to drive a focus on the bottom line. I saw clients continuing to invest, to automate and to innovate. And I saw new, powerful practices implemented, such as voice recognition and offshoring. I saw my individual clients get more productive. -4- I’ve been on a journey to understand what’s going on, recognizing that every sector has its own story. I considered the possibility that the mix of businesses has shifted, for example because of the growth in services or productive sectors moving to foreign locales. But the slowdown is widespread. Nearly every sector has experienced some decline in productivity growth since the mid-2000s (although the extent varies across sectors).5 I considered mismeasurement. Some surely exists; for example, the leisure value of free apps on a smartphone isn’t measured, while the price of toys is. But again, the widespread nature of the decline makes mismeasurement unlikely as an across-the-board explanation. Productivity growth could also be hampered by regulatory costs and the expense of implementing cybersecurity. Costs have certainly been created that don’t generate revenues. But back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest these costs aren’t large enough to explain the slowdown. It’s also possible that this is just a pause before an acceleration due to AI and digitization. That would be great! But I never saw the pause, and I worry about hope as a strategy. Some have argued that we’ve already picked all the “low-hanging fruit” when it comes to transformative technologies.6 That’s a depressing thought. But it can’t be true. Spend time with any researcher in AI or biotech and your mind will reel with the possibilities. -5- Finally, at my house, there’s some debate about whether email, texting and social media are enablers of productivity or whether they may well be the problem. I’ll leave that debate for dinner tonight. The Role of Investment So what do I think I know? I believe the decline in productivity growth is real. And I believe that part of the cause is at least 15 years of business underinvestment. Recent research has found that between 2000 and 2015, business investment was low relative to measures of corporate profitability, even when taking into account increased investment in intangible assets.7 This “investment gap” has been driven by industry leaders and productivity leaders not investing in growth the way they once did. Airlines have moderated capacity growth, banks aren’t adding branches and even successful retailers aren’t adding stores. And in my view, it’s easy to draw a line from lower investment to lower productivity growth, particularly to the extent large incumbent firms drive productivity.8 Many factors might be contributing to lower investment. Short-termism is increasing as CEO tenure decreases and corporate activism escalates. Share repurchases and M&A have become compelling alternate uses of capital, especially as more and more industries focus their metrics on return on capital employed (ROCE). The number of publicly traded firms has fallen more than 50 percent, deferring to private market strategies that manage capital tightly.9 Cyclical industries have learned the lessons of overcapacity. And, finally, some companies are still feeling “hungover” from the Great Recession. I’ve spoken with business leaders who, even if they see -6- opportunities for investment, are reluctant to take them. They continually see the next recession as “just around the corner.” You hear that today. The good news is investment could come back in the context of a stronger economy. This seems to be what recent data suggest. In 2018, year-over-year investment growth was 6.9 percent, compared with 5.2 percent in 2017 and just half a percent in 2016.10 We need that momentum to continue. The Drop in Startups Another factor contributing to slower productivity growth might be declining startup rates. Successful entrants drive innovation, which drives productivity. But the data show a massive reduction in entry rates in all states and all sectors. Startups accounted for 12 percent of all firms in the late 1980s. That fell to 10.6 percent in the mid-2000s and to 8 percent after 2008.11 As with investment, some of this decline might reflect lingering risk aversion after the Great Recession. Some might be the impact of regulation (for example, there have only been 13 de novo banks in the past nine years). Research also points to the slow growth of the working-age population and challenges to immigration as explanations.12 In addition, I hear there are tangible impediments—such as acquiring the necessary technology and talent—to building the scale and sophistication required to compete in today’s world. Barriers to Exit In addition, there’s evidence that the dispersion of productivity within industries has increased— more-productive firms are getting more productive, and less-productive firms lag behind.13 -7- When we talk to firms at the frontier, productivity gains seem robust. But aggregate productivity is potentially being held back by the laggards. This could be occurring because there are greater barriers to the diffusion of productivity enhancements, such as the required investments in intellectual property or information technology. And, at the same time the productivity gap is getting wider, less-productive firms have become less likely to exit the market.14 It sounds counterintuitive, but it’s real. Bankruptcies have dropped consistently over time (excepting, of course, the Great Recession). Perhaps this is a temporary result of the long economic upturn. Perhaps the rising median rate of profitability is keeping underperformers afloat, with the winners choosing profit over market share. Or perhaps low interest rates have helped keep low- performing companies alive.15 The fact that we’re late in the business cycle is both a challenge and an opportunity. On the one hand, marginal hires might be less productive. On the other hand, firms may find themselves pressed to do more with less, which would boost productivity. The last year has been interesting, with productivity growth averaging 1.7 percent, compared with 1.1 percent in 2017 and just 0.1 percent in 2016. It’s too early to call a turn, but a former consultant can dream! Prospects of Change Let me leave you with the thought that change is possible. Technological innovations such as AI and digitization aren’t going away. As the Great Recession fades further into memory, economic tailwinds may give both entrepreneurs and existing firms more confidence to invest in their businesses and grow their markets. Policymakers can help. Corporate leaders need a healthy environment for business investment and entrepreneurship. As I talk to my contacts, that is their -8- primary topic of discussion. “If the rules are clear and the political environment is stable,” they say, “American businesses will find a way to grow.” Thank you, and I look forward to your questions and comments. 1 Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia, March 10, 2005. 2 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 3 The increased use of stock options was driven by several factors, including shareholder pressure, changes in accounting and disclosure rules, and regulation limiting the deductibility of CEO salaries. For more, see Kevin J. Murphy, “Executive Compensation: Where We Are, and How We Got There.” In Constantinides, George M., Milton Harris, and Rene M. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 2013, vol. 2, part A, pp. 211-356. 4 Mark Doms, “Productivity Growth and the Retail Sector,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter no. 2004-37, December 2004; and McKinsey Global Institute, ”U.S. Productivity Growth 1995-2000: Understanding the Contribution of Information Technology Relative to Other Factors,” October 2001. 5 Martin Baily and Nicholas Montalbano, “Why is U.S. Productivity Growth So Slow?” Brookings Institution Hutchins Center Working Paper no. 22, September 2016. 6 For example, see Robert J. Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.: 2016. 7 German Gutierrez and Thomas Philipon, “Investmentless Growth: An Empirical Investigation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017. 8 Daniel Garcia-Macia, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J. Klenow, “How Destructive is Innovation?” U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper no. CES-WP-17-04, January 01, 2017. 9 Craig Doidge, Kathleen Kahle, Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz, “Eclipse of the Public Corporation or Eclipse of the Public Markets?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Winter 2018, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 8–16. 10 Based on annual percent change in real private nonresidential fixed investment. 11 Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 3–24. 12 Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,” Manuscript, May 2018. 13 Ryan A. Decker, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness,” NBER Working Paper no. 24236, January 2018. 14 Ibid. 15 Andrew G. Haldane, “Productivity Puzzles,” Speech at the London School of Economics, London, England, March 20, 2017.

1 Sentiment and the Real Economy Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond New York Association for Business Economics New York, New York May 15, 2019 Good afternoon. Thank you very much for inviting me to speak with you today. Your list of past speakers reads like an economics hall of fame, but I hope I can add something interesting to the conversation.1 I’d like to start by telling you a little bit about my background and my perspective, and then I’ll share some thoughts on the economy and monetary policy. In particular, I’ll talk about the role of sentiment in consumer and firm behavior and some implications for conducting monetary policy. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System. I joined the Richmond Fed last January after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I had roles including chief financial officer, chief risk officer and leading our offices in the Southeast. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. So I hope to bring a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues on the committee are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I can approach things as a practitioner rather than a researcher. -2- That said, I am tremendously grateful for the support of my research team at the Richmond Fed. The insights I’ll share with you today stem from my experience in business, but they’ve been sharpened and refined through long conversations with our economists. The Current Outlook At the Fed, we often describe ourselves as data dependent. The data today tell us we had a very strong 2018, with average GDP growth of 3 percent, unemployment below 4 percent and inflation basically right at our 2 percent target. Some numbers looked weaker at the beginning of this year, but the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ advance estimate for first quarter GDP growth was 3.2 percent. The labor market also remains strong with unemployment now down to 3.6 percent. Most forecasters anticipate continued growth this year, as do I. To be sure, inflation so far this year is running a little below our target. That might well be due to transitory factors, as the chairman outlined in his recent press conference. In this context, it makes sense to remain patient. There’s not a strong case to push rates higher when inflation is under control; there’s not a strong case to move lower when growth remains healthy. One reason I’m patient is I believe our economy had a short-term “sentiment shock” at the end of last year and the beginning of this year. There was a significant drop in business, consumer and investor confidence fueled by—and overreacting to—international uncertainty, financial market volatility and the government shutdown and its implications for our political health. These events all stoked fears about the real economy at a time when I believe the broader picture had not really changed. -3- Defining Sentiment What do I mean by “sentiment”? As a practitioner and as a policymaker I’ve learned that the economy can move in ways not fully justified by moves in fundamentals. Especially sensitive are variables that depend on expectations about the future, such as spending on consumer durables, investment and, most famously, stock prices. This suggests that something else matters. I’m calling that business and consumer sentiment. In his seminal 1936 book The General Theory of Unemployment, John Maynard Keynes used the phrase “animal spirits” to describe the idea that beliefs and views not only matter for decision- making, but also change in ways that are hard to predict and manage. As a longtime business practitioner, I too think of sentiment in this way. I believe our economy’s performance is driven in important ways by the outlook and beliefs of consumers and businesses—over and above what the hard data, and past patterns in it, by themselves would imply. In other words, having the incoming data is one thing, but knowing what consumers and companies think about the road ahead is quite another. Scholars have formalized the notion of sentiment in a variety of ways. Examples include the now large literatures on “news shocks,” “sunspot shocks,” “uncertainty shocks,” “sticky information,” “data misperceptions” and the like.2 Clearly, the definition of sentiment is tricky. But what these notions all have in common is the idea that businesses and consumers have to form views in order to operate successfully in an uncertain world, and that they may at times find it very difficult to do so. This latter point is especially important in my view. -4- Sentiment is not unrelated to “confidence.” Confidence is a must for businesses to want to invest and for credit and equity markets to be willing to finance that investment. As a practitioner, it’s not surprising to me that the investment is significantly more volatile than GDP. Confidence is also essential for consumers to spend, but, in our economy, most of what we produce is for immediate consumption rather than investment. Spending for immediate consumption isn’t greatly affected by confidence, but, because households bear substantial risks that they cannot easily insure, such as losing a job or falling ill, they are unlikely to spend on big ticket items without at least some assurance of future stability. As a result, a sudden pullback in their expectations could easily affect their expenditures and tip the economy into recession. Practitioners and policymakers have both, at some general level, long recognized what I’ve described. I view the many policy levers erected around us— the automatic stabilizers of unemployment insurance, safety net programs and deposit insurance, among others— as a response to the idea that fear and optimism should not contribute unduly to the volatility of our economy. Nonetheless, no amount of publicly funded safety can fully remove the role of sentiment and confidence, as I think the great financial crisis taught us all, and New Yorkers especially. The Impact of Sentiment I saw clearly the role of sentiment and confidence in my business experience. Every year, I observed companies make budget assumptions that incorporated their assessments of highly uncertain variables, such as the future state of the economy, the actions of their competitors and -5- changes in regulation. The CFO typically started from a place of caution, while the business unit leaders started with optimism. A debate generally ensued, to be settled by the CEO. When sentiment moved, so did the relative balance of power. Higher confidence led to aggressive assumptions and lower confidence to the opposite. This affected investment levels, hiring levels and discretionary spending. At my old firm, our operating committee debated for hours. Sentiment moved our hiring, pricing and spending targets, as well as the amount of risk we were willing to bear. In my short Fed experience, I’ve seen it even more clearly. At the end of 2018, the considerable uncertainty I described a few minutes ago led to large drops in sentiment. Between December 2018 and January 2019, the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index dropped seven points, the largest one-month decline since 2013. The Conference Board’s measure of CEO confidence also fell significantly in the fourth quarter to its lowest level since 2012. We then saw weak numbers in January and February; for example, February retail sales and payroll employment growth were quite low. Perhaps that’s also why inflation in the first quarter was so weak. Firms with less confidence have less conviction to push through price increases. But sentiment runs both ways. By the end of February, international uncertainty had decreased and the shutdown was over. Perhaps our shift to a patient stance on monetary policy helped. The markets rebounded, as did sentiment. Now the data once again look relatively healthy. -6- I believe we see the importance of sentiment in monetary policy. One interpretation of policies like forward guidance is that they are a recognition of the power of sentiment and the importance of clearly spelling out our intentions to avoid the proliferation of competing views and beliefs about what else we might do. And in my view, sentiment supports the case for quantitative easing should we ever find ourselves again confronting the zero lower bound. There is a great deal of analysis that questions the impact of quantitative easing in response to the Great Recession, but there is no doubt in my mind that chairman Bernanke whipping out another arrow helped the economy at a time when confidence was fragile. Has Sentiment Become More Important? I want to make the case that sentiment is up in importance—and that at the same time, it has become more volatile. One indicator might be the increased visibility of this topic in the academic literature over the past 15 years. But more generally, both good and bad news diffuse significantly more quickly and broadly. We surf the news on our phone 10 times per day. The business media is everywhere, even on planes. And the Fed contributes, for example, by having even more press conference and speeches. Relative to a few decades ago, consumers might be more exposed to the vagaries of sentiment. In 2016, according to the Fed’s Survey of Consumer Finances, about 57 percent of middle-aged families were invested in the stock market, compared with 40 percent in 1989.3 And they’re more likely to be invested in index funds that move with the market than with company fundamentals. Households also might still be scarred by the effects of the Great Recession; -7- recent research by Richmond Fed economists found that even six years after the recession ended, consumers were the most uncertain they’d been since the late 1970s.4 In addition, the business reaction function has gotten faster. One reason is that CEO short- termism has increased as activism in the market for corporate control has shifted companies’ focus. I also think firms’ resilience is down. They start with lower confidence. I hear from business leaders who are still feeling “hungover” from the Great Recession. While economic upturns are more likely to die of a heart attack than of old age, the length of the current upturn makes many people nervous that another recession is right around the corner. All of this may be exacerbated by higher leverage; according to the Fed’s Financial Stability Report, which was released just last week, business borrowing relative to GDP is historically high at present. Levered companies have a bias toward taking action on negative news, including cutting costs, reducing staff and pricing for volume. These all lead to an asymmetry in which firms are much more cautious about the downside than they are optimistic about the upside.5 Implications for the Economy and Monetary Policy Let’s assume I’m correct that sentiment is both more important and more volatile. What are the implications for the economy and for policy? One implication, I believe, is that both consumers and businesses have a higher bar for spending decisions, which would tend to reduce consumer spending and lower firms’ investment posture. From that perspective, it’s possible that some of the tepid recovery from the Great Recession was a self-fulfilling lack of belief in the strength of the economy. And I see it continuing today with a -8- negative tilt or asymmetry, as I discussed before. Firms are frustrated with political polarization and uncertainty about regulation. This limits their pricing courage and caps the upside on their spending and investment decisions. For these reasons, I don’t discount the idea that we could talk ourselves into a recession. Some economists have studied the spread of information from a disease perspective, where the information spreads slowly at first but quickly gains steam. I would argue that in today’s media climate, the “disease” spreads faster. (Of course, it’s possible that the “disease” could also be good news, but recent research suggests that firms are much more likely to react to negative economic news than positive economic news.6) For monetary policymakers, we have to be aware that our communication matters critically. Long gone are the days when we could change rates and then wait for economic actors to discern that change and react. You might have heard the story that for many years people would use the size of Alan Greenspan’s briefcase as a clue to the stance of monetary policy; a thick briefcase meant a rate change, and a thin briefcase meant the status quo.7 Now, in addition to releasing a detailed statement after every FOMC meeting, the chair gives a press conference. The public also gets a lot of information through speeches by other Fed leaders and our Summary of Economic Projections (SEP, also known as the “dot plots”). But it’s worth asking if we’re helping or just confusing things. There might be ways we can clarify our communications, such as the chair’s recent efforts to have more press conferences. -9- We might also try to simplify communications tools such as the SEP. Such steps are part of the review of our monetary policy framework that is currently being led by Vice Chair Clarida.8 It’s also the case that monetary policy becomes about more than interest rates per se. In a volatile environment, rate moves can indicate more than stimulation or restriction. They are also taken as signals on the health of the economy. Counterintuitively, then, rate moves can send unintended messages. For example, in March the market reacted to a lower median rate path in the SEP by lowering inflation expectations. Similarly, when the Fed signaled in mid-2013 that it might begin winding down its bond purchases due to a strengthening economy, investors panicked and a global sell-off ensued. And this can happen quickly, both when the Fed is removing or adding accommodation. We need to recognize communication as a monetary policy transmission channel, acknowledging that this channel adds value to nontraditional measures such as quantitative easing. Beyond the scope of monetary policy, there might be other steps to reduce the asymmetry of sentiment, such as providing incentives for productive investment or, more broadly, more regulatory certainty. Paying closer attention to corporate debt could increase firms’ resiliency. If the ground beneath them is solid, firms’ memories of the bad times will eventually fade. Keeping an Ear to the Ground I started by talking about myself, and that’s how I’m going to conclude. Since coming to the Richmond Fed, I’ve tried to leverage my business background in order to deeply understand sentiment. That’s why I prioritize conversations with contacts. My approach to policymaking has -10- been to spend substantial time, each and every FOMC cycle, working to understand and integrate the informal but essential insights of our business and community stakeholders with the statistical analysis and clear reasoning of the economics profession. Examples of this approach include the close eye I keep on business sentiment surveys, production indices like the one produced by the Institute for Supply Management and diffusion indices, including our own at the Richmond Fed. I’ve also reoriented our research team toward external outreach, and we are beefing up our own survey capabilities to better monitor real-time changes in sentiment. When I talk to business leaders in the Fifth District, I ask about budget assumptions. Are you planning for strong, solid or moderate growth? I ask about investment plans. Are you going to aggressively grow or cut back? And I ask about discretionary spending. This is the first thing people cut back on when their expectations are shaky. I learned that as a consultant. In my conversations today, my contacts tell me that the economy is sound but not spectacular. Consumer confidence has rebounded, anchored by a strong labor market, good income prospects, healthy credit markets and high savings. Once the environment settled, consumers were ready and able to resume spending. But business recovery looks to be slower. They don’t feel they have much pricing power. They are anxious about the future. They worry about political polarization and its impact on the environment for investment and regulation. They worry about international markets and trade and the implications for the global economy. They tell me they are maintaining their investment programs but are cautious about funding major expansion. They are not cutting back investments or jobs or discretionary spending, at least not yet. As a -11- consequence, I still see an economy that is sound. But confidence—especially business confidence—is fragile. It’s our job as policymakers to try to support it. Thank you, and now I welcome your reactions and questions. 1 Thank you to Kartik Athreya, Thomas Lubik, Jessie Romero and Pierre-Daniel Sarte for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 For example, see Rüdiger Bachmann, Steffen Elstner, and Eric R. Sims, “Uncertainty and Economic Activity: Evidence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2013, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 217-249; Christopher D. Carroll, “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003, vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 269-298; Ryan Chahrour and Kyle Jurado, “News or Noise? The Missing Link,” American Economic Review, July 2018, vol. 108, no. 7, pp. 1702-1736; Thomas A. Lubik and Frank Schorfheide, “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, March 2004, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 190-217; Pierre-Daniel Sarte, “When is Sticky Information More Information?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, September 2014, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 1345- 1379. 3 B. Ravikumar, “How Has Stock Ownership Trended in the Past Few Decades?” St. Louis Fed On the Economy blog, April 9, 2018. 4 Santiago Pinto, Robert Sharp, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. “The Information Content and Statistical Properties of Diffusion Indices,” conditionally accepted at the International Journal of Central Banking, 2018. Working paper version here. 5 While firms focus strongly on GDP expectations, research has noted that inflation expectations actually move less than one would expect in a world where businesses and consumers are so well-informed. That’s because, for most firms, their industry pricing power trumps aggregate statistics in importance. See, for example, Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, “How Do Firms Form Their Expectations? New Survey Evidence,” American Economic Review, September 2018, vol. 108, no. 9, pp. 2671-2713; and Gregory N. Mankiw and Ricardo Reis, “Pervasive Stickiness,” American Economic Review, May 2006, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 164-169. 6Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Kumar (2018). 7 William T. Gavin and Rachel J. Mandal, “Inside the Briefcase: the Art of Predicting the Federal Reserve,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Regional Economist, July 2000. 8 Richard H. Clarida, “The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices,” Speech at the “Fed Listens: Distributional Consequences of the Cycle and Monetary Policy” conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota, April 9, 2019.

The Effects of Market Concentration on Suppliers Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Market Structure and the Macroeconomy Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Richmond, Virginia May 16, 2019 Thank you all very much for joining us. The questions we’re here to explore are both very important and very complex, and I’m very grateful for the opportunity to learn from the best minds in the business. With apologies to the Richmond Fed folks in the room, who’ve heard this before, I thought I’d start by telling you a little bit about myself and my perspective. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. I joined the Richmond Fed last January, after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey where I had roles including chief financial officer, chief risk officer and leading our offices in the Southeast. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation, prices – and, yes, M&A – and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. As the only member of the FOMC coming from management, I can approach the issues your work sheds light on as a practitioner rather than a researcher. And that’s how I approach the topic of market concentration. I’ve certainly seen industries that have consolidated and, as a consequence, fundamentally altered their competitive dynamics and -2- the resulting markups they capture. Airlines are a classic example. Once, they were the poster child for destroying value. But about 10 years ago, the U.S. industry consolidated to four carriers, and they leveraged international joint ventures to limit competition transoceanically. As a result, they increased their ability to profit: They found it easier to introduce and sustain higher fares and new fee structures, and they increased their negotiating power vis-à-vis their unions. Profitability has improved dramatically. But I have to say I am less confident that the same effect has been replicated across industries. Modest increases in concentration have nowhere near the power I just outlined. Markets are increasingly globally competitive or—as our Richmond team has outlined—locally competitive. The inflation data we monitor suggests that, if anything, business are losing rather than gaining pricing power. So, why are we seeing markups increase? One aspect of market concentration that strikes me as particularly important is the effect on suppliers: In the cases I’ve been a part of, and in my experience more generally, when firms get large, they acquire more bargaining power—especially with respect to their suppliers. This might help to explain how increased market concentration could coexist with quite muted inflation, particularly for consumer goods. It’s easiest to see in the retail sector. In 2017, the five largest retailers in the United States accounted for more than 35 percent of the 100 largest retailers’ total U.S. sales. I’ve seen directly the significantly greater pressure that these large stores are now able to exert on manufacturers with respect to pricing, delivery time and packaging, among other -3- variables. Suppliers that don’t comply might be replaced or lose space on a store’s shelves. And, as trade barriers and the costs of transportation and information have declined, it has become easier for retailers to develop new suppliers, both domestic and foreign, to take the place of suppliers who can’t meet their requirements. As these trends continue, and more downstream firms are subject to this “new normal,” I suspect we will experience continued downward pressure on an even broader range of relative prices. And these real factors could interact with monetary policy in a way that leads to a longer period of relatively low inflation. The shift toward “private label” goods also has affected retailers’ bargaining power. Long gone are the days of “generic” food sold in black and white cans. Today, large retailers have the scale to develop their own products, and they can distribute everything from gourmet chocolate to pet food to clothing. By one estimate, the dollar share of private label goods will account for more than 25 percent of U.S. sales within the next decade. Private label goods offer retailers higher profit margins and a chance to increase their connection to consumers. But they also give retailers leverage over national brands; research has found that retailers earn much higher margins on national brands in categories where they have a strong presence with a store brand. Retail isn’t the only sector where bargaining power relative to suppliers has increased. Beginning with the auto industry, companies across sectors have invested significantly in the capabilities and sophistication of their purchasing departments. They have built talent in their organizations and set high aspirations for savings. Executives are now, far more than at earlier points in my career, incentivized to avoid price increases, so they look for creative ways to reconfigure their operations to reduce purchasing volume and capture margin dollars from suppliers. When these -4- efforts are successful, they paint a different picture of how market concentration might lead to higher profits—a picture with far lower inflationary pressures. And, of course, this perspective is equally applicable to the biggest supplier—labor. We know labor’s share of income has been decreasing over time. Part of that is perhaps the declining role and influence of labor unions. Part is no doubt the opening and leverage of low-cost global labor pools. But part is also likely increased bargaining power by evermore concentrated employers within domestic markets. I’m struck, as I speak to employers and employees about today’s tight labor markets, by how hard it has been to see significant wage increases. Employees aren’t changing jobs the way they did in the late ’90s; they often cite a “hangover” from the Great Recession that has made them feel less secure. Employers feel they have more ability to withstand wage pressure than they have power to pass increases along. Net, I believe more-concentrated employers are leveraging their market power not to raise prices to consumers but to extract value from suppliers and from employees. Understanding how market power affects labor and suppliers, and in turn the economy more broadly, is a topic I’m continuing to study and one I would love to get your thoughts on. Now, I welcome your reactions and questions. -5-

Challenges to Women’s Labor Force Participation Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Charlotte Economics Club Charlotte, North Carolina June 3, 2019 Good afternoon. Thank you very much for inviting me to join you today. I’d like to tell you a little bit about my background and my perspective, and then I’d like to share some thoughts on growing the economy. Before I say more, note that the views I expre ss are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System. 1 I joined the Richmond Fed last January after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I was the chief financial officer and led the offices in the South. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. So I’m trying to bring a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues on the committee are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I can approach things as a practitioner rather than a researcher. At the same time, I have greatly enjoyed the opportunity to dig into economic s. In particular, I’ve been studying long-run economic growth. At some level, the math of growth is pretty simple: We need more people working, and we need them to be more productive. In recent years, however, both population and productivity growth have been slow. I’m hopeful that productivity growth will improve, but in the meantime, it’s worth exploring how we can draw workers off the -2- sidelines. We need that to happen — for the health of our economy, for our fiscal soundness and to lift the fortunes of those left behind. Trends in Women’s Labor Force Participation A lot has been written about the declining rate of male participation in the workforce, but I’d like to spend today focusing on the participation of women. In the United States, women’s labor force participation increased steadily throughout the second hal f of the 20th century. But around 2000, it leveled off and then began to decline . This is a divergence from other developed countries. In the late 1990s, for example, the labor force participation rate for women aged 25- 54, whom I’ll refer to as prime-age women, was the same in the United States and Canada. Since then, however, the rate has continued to increase in Canada while it has decreased here, leading to a 7.9 percentage point gap between the two countries in 2017. If the United States had the same prime-age participation rate as Canada , an additional 5 million women would be in the labor force.2 That would be a significant boost to our potential growth. What is behind the gap in women’s participation? First, we need to calibrate in the context of demographics. One difference we see in the United States is a much larger population of Hispanic women, who traditionally have a lower labor force participation rate than non -Hispanic women, by around 9 points.3 The share of the female labor force that is Hispanic has increased from 8.7 percent in 1997 to 16.4 percent in 2016, a trend that accounts for just under a point of the participation gap. But note that this trend is changing. The participation rate for all prime -age women in the United States has increased since 2015, likely due to the strengthening economy, and some have found that Hispanic women accounted for almost two-thirds of the increase. 4 -3- Another demographic trend to consider is educational attainment. Higher levels of education are associated with higher labor force participation, and in both countries, an increase in the number of women with a college education boosted their participation . But the increase was larger in Canada, where the share of prime -age women with a bachelor’s degree increased almost 17 percentage points from 1997 to 2015. In the United States, the share increased 11.4 points. Increasing levels of education accounted fo r an increase in participation of almost 4.5 points from 1997 to 2016 in Canada versus just under 2 points in the United States. Finally, let’s look at the effect of an aging population, which tends to lower participation rates. In this case, the relative demographics actually helped the United States, although the overall effect was fairly small. Between 1997 and 2016, an aging population cost Canada a quarter of a point; during the same time period in the United States, the aging of the population had very little effect. If you are following the math, we started with a 7.9 point gap, plus a quarter of a point due to an aging population in Canada. Then, we subtract 2.5 points for education and around 1 point for the Hispanic population. That leaves us with roughly 4.5 points unexplained by demographics. -4- Challenges Facing Less-Educated Women What’s behind the remaining gap? You might assume, as I did, that parental obligations drive the difference, but the number of women not working for this reason has not significantly increased over this time period. Of course, participation does vary for women who have children, but the decline in participation does not fall along those lines. Instead, the decline is most dramatic for prime-age women with less formal education — regardless of whether they have children or not . Between 1997 and 2015, the U.S. participation rate for prime-age women of all education levels dropped almost 3 percentage points. But for prime-age women with a high school education or less, participation dropped 7.4 points. It fell even further — almost 9 points — for women aged 25 to 44. Surprisingly, that is not the story in Canada . In Canada, the increase in women’s participation is driven primarily by women aged 45 to 54, who experienced an increase of almost 10 points. Within that group, the gain was largest for women with less formal education , roughly 8 points. So what is going on with less-educated women that is driving down their participation in the workforce in the United States yet driving it up in Canada? And more important, what can we do about it? With this population, and this decision, I want to make the case that money matters. So let’s look at the fundamental economic equation for these women . The Economic Equation The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a great program that lift s millions of people out of poverty each year.5 But its phase-out can create barriers to working. 6 Imagine a woman in her -5- mid-30s. She has two children and lives in northern Virginia, where she works at a day care center and is married to a construction worker. If they both work full time, they earn around $55,000 per year — at which point they no longer qualify for the EITC and stand to lose $3,700 at tax time.7 And because our system taxes the first dollar earned by the second earner at the same rate as the last dollar earned by the primary earner , they are pushed into a higher tax bracket. Add to this the cost of child care and other work-related expenses, and the family’s monthly take-home pay might be actually higher when the woman does not work or works informally in the shadow economy. Similarly, disability insurance is a vital safety net for many people. But there are aspects of our disability insurance program, including the fact that you instantly forfeit life-long benefits if you engage in the workforce, that create disincentives to working. The number of prime -age women in the United States who received Social Security disability insurance benefits increased from 1.2 million in 2000 to 1.9 million in 2014, increasing from 2.0 percent to 3.0 percent of women in this age group.8 Let’s imagine a single mother in her mid-40s, working as a retail cashier in Columbia, South Carolina. She struggles with a chronic illness that makes it difficult for her to work. Disability insurance provides her with a lower gross income than working full t ime, but it lasts until retirement, comes with Medicare eligibility and doesn’t entail costs such as child care. If she takes a full-time job, she has to assess the risk that — if that job goes away for any reason — she loses these benefits that bridge to retirement. -6- Finally, let’s imagine a married woman who works in a poultry processing plant in West Virginia. If she and her spouse both work, they earn an additional $600 a month, but there are a lot of nonfinancial incentives — what I’d call the “hassle factor” — that motivate not working or working informally. If she works informally, for example, by babysitting for friends or family, she has a more flexible schedule and her day-to-day environment may be more attractive . What Can Be Done? How do we make it more likely that women like the ones I’ve described participate in the labor force? Employers play a big role. We hear a lot these days about companies struggling to find employees. They can break down barriers to women’s participation by offering more stable schedules, better working conditions or on -site child care. For example, we know of a furniture maker in West Virginia who’s been able to attract and retain a majority female labor force by offering a single shift, replacing educational requirements with apprentice -style training and aiming to provide employees with a better lifestyle. And, while I mentioned earlier that the most dramatic decline in participation does not appear to be among women with children, employers could also consider paid maternity leave and high - quality affordable child care. Some research has found that over a quarter of the increase in women’s labor force participation in other OECD countries relative to the United States is due to the expansion of these family-friendly policies.9 -7- Policymakers can help. I’ve discussed policies that may discourage women from entering or staying in the labor force, such as the joint tax system, the phase-out of the EITC or the structure of disability insurance. Fiscal policies are out of the Fed’s purview, and therefore I’m not taking a stand on any particular policy nor suggesting the incentives have changed, but I do think that the total incentive structure merits reexamination. Work has been done that shows that a Canadian tax reform that effectively reduced the tax rates of a second ear ner increased the labor supply of married women. 10 And finally, solutions can come from the se women themselves. As I noted earlier, we know that education increases women’s participation in the workforce. Workers with more education also tend to have higher earnings, greater wealth, more resiliency to downturns and better health. But before we turn this problem back to the workers, we have to remember that the same barriers that make it hard for many women to be in the workforce make it hard to go back to school . In our district, we’ve seen some innovative solutions to breaking down these barriers, such as the Workforce Investment Network (WIN) Program in Charlotte, a collaboration between the Carolina Fintech Hub, community partners and employers . The WIN program targets women and minorities, provides technical training and soft-skill development and guarantees program graduates a full-time position at participating financial services firms. Importantly, in addition to paying students during the training, the WIN program provides wraparound services, such as transportation and child care assistance, that make it easier for students to complete the program . -8- Conclusion To sum up, women with less education in the United States face a number of obstacles to working, which could be contributing to a decline in women’s labor force participation in the United States relative to other countries. As a policymaker, I’m concerned not only about the well-being of these individuals, but also about our country’s long-term economic growth. Employers, policymakers and workers can invest to remove these obstacles; doing so would benefit them and our nation as a whole. Thank you, and now I look forward to your reactions and questions. 1 Thank you to Nina Mantilla and Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 This figure is based on the prime-age participation rate in Canada in 2017. 3 Richmond Fed calculations based on Bureau of Labor Statistics data. The 2016 labor force participation rate for prime-age Hispanic women was 66.7; for non-Hispanic women it was 75.8. 4 Data is for 2015 through 2018, see John Robertson, “X Factor: Hispanic Women Drive the Labor-Force Comeback,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta macroblog, March 6, 2019. 5 In 2016, it was estimated that the EITC lifted between 4.1 million and 5.8 million people (including 3 million children) out of poverty, according to a 2018 report by the U.S. House Committee on the Budget. 6 Nada Eissa and Hilary W. Hoynes, “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC and Labor Supply,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 2006, vol. 20, pp. 73-110. 7 Author’s calculations using TAXSIM v.27. Daniel Richard Feenberg and Elizabeth Coutts, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Winter 1993, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.189-94. Available via the NBER website. 8 Social Security Administration, “Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability Program, 2000,” September 2001; Social Security Administration “Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability Program, 2014,” November 2015. 9 Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Female Labor Supply: Why is the United States Falling Behind?” American Economic Review, May 2013, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 251-56. 10 Thomas F. Crossley and Sung-Hee Jeon, “Joint Taxation and the Labour Supply of Married Women: Evidence from the Canadian Tax Reform of 1988,” Fiscal Studies, 2007, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 343-65.
