1 Maximum Employment and Monetary Policy September 18, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Money Marketeers of New York University New York, New York The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) conducts the nation’s monetary policy subject to its congressional mandate to pursue “maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long- term interest rates.”1 Most people talk about only the first two objectives and refer to the Fed’s “dual mandate.” The dual mandate poses a clear challenge for the FOMC in times like these. Three years after the end of the Great Recession, employment seems far from what anyone would consider its maximum level by historical standards, with unemployment above 8 percent, labor force participation having fallen dramatically and the ratio of employment to population at its lowest level in nearly 30 years. Although we have seen spurts of more robust employment growth, they seem to peter out after several months. Since employment bottomed out in February 2010, we’ve only managed to add 135,000 net new jobs per month, a rate that is generally not expected to be able to bring down unemployment very rapidly. With this backdrop, the FOMC voted recently to initiate a new program of asset purchases by buying additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a rate of $40 billion per month. The Committee stated that it “expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens,” and that it currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015. As you may know, I dissented, and I will discuss the reasons for my dissent later in my remarks. The Committee’s actions and communications are consistent with a widespread view of the dual mandate — namely, that as long as unemployment remains high, the Fed has room to stimulate employment growth without putting its price stability goal too much at risk. In this view, high unemployment represents slack in the economy that prevents inflationary pressures from taking hold — and could even lead to unwelcome disinflation or deflation. A somewhat stronger reading of the mandate even suggests that, in circumstances like the present, the Fed can and should accept an increased rate of inflation for some time in order to accelerate improvement in labor market conditions. While I do not believe this view of the mandate is driving the Committee’s recent decisions, it’s a view that has been associated with a number of prominent economists. In my remarks today, I would like to take a closer look at the concept of economic slack and what it means for the Fed’s maximum employment mandate. A review of the role of maximum employment in the conduct of monetary policy leads naturally, I believe, to a degree of 2 skepticism regarding the net benefits of adding further monetary stimulus in the present environment. So you won’t be surprised to hear me tell you that the views I express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my FOMC colleagues.2 As you might expect, the Committee has spent a great deal of time in recent years studying labor market conditions and their implications for our monetary policy mission. In January of this year, the FOMC released a Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy statement.3 That statement outlined a broad set of principles pertaining to the implementation of its congressional mandate. The FOMC spent a good deal of time on the question of how to measure performance relative to our price stability mandate. Because the inflation rate over the longer run is determined by monetary policy, the Committee has the ability to specify a numerical target for inflation. The Committee decided that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The maximum employment objective of the mandate also requires a yardstick against which to compare actual labor market performance. One possible approach is to gauge what the employment rate or the unemployment rate would be in “normal times,” after the economy has been able to recover from adversity. “To be precise, to what number would the unemployment rate converge, in the future, in the absence of further shocks and under appropriate monetary policy.” Call this “the long-run normal rate of unemployment,” or just “the long-run unemployment rate.” This measure also can be thought of in terms of the path to which employment would converge in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate policy. Given how the size of the labor force behaves over time, the unemployment rate and the level of employment are, at least conceptually, interchangeable ways of thinking about labor market conditions. 4 For simplicity and convenience, in the rest of my remarks, I will refer to the unemployment rate, but all that I will say can be translated directly into statements about employment or, for that matter, output. In evaluating the current stance of monetary policy, the long-run unemployment rate would appear to be an attractive yardstick, since it provides a sense of where one ultimately would like to be. But for assessing monetary policy on a month-to-month or quarter-to-quarter basis, the long-run unemployment rate can be very misleading. For example, when unemployment is relatively high, it’s unlikely that unemployment can be made to return to the long-run unemployment rate at a very rapid clip ― within a quarter or two, say. At such times, the best possible monetary policy will only bring unemployment down gradually over time. We can debate whether a given pace is faster or slower than optimal. But there is undoubtedly some optimal pace, and it’s unlikely to be virtually instantaneous. While that convergence process is going on, to what unemployment rate should we refer when assessing monetary policy? In other words, while an economy is adjusting to significant economic shocks, what constitutes “maximum employment”? Surely not the long-run rate, because how far we are away from that rate does not, in general, tell us how fast we should be returning. 3 A few examples illustrate this principle. Consider a large and permanent oil price increase. Such “supply shocks” reduce the productive capacity of the economy. On impact, inflation and unemployment may rise. Costly and time-consuming adjustments take place in response to the new relative price of oil; businesses shift input mixes and adjust their capital, while consumers alter spending patterns. Over time, productive capacity is restored and real incomes recover. In the meantime, before those adjustments are complete, an attempt to reduce unemployment too rapidly is likely to spark more inflation; conversely, allowing disinflation to emerge may cause unemployment to decline too slowly. In other words, there’s a reference unemployment rate that is relevant for monetary policy, and until the real economic adjustments to the oil price shock have taken place, it will be above the long-run rate. Another example, with similar implications, is an acceleration of productivity growth similar to the one we saw in the late 1990s. This might allow lower unemployment without accelerating inflation. A focus on the long-run unemployment rate might lead one to tighten monetary policy prematurely. Acknowledging that the right yardstick for monetary policy might have fallen below the long-run unemployment rate leads to better outcomes. As a third and final example, consider a shock that causes economic activity to shift rapidly away from some sectors and toward others. Such a shock could lead to persistently high unemployment because costly and time-consuming retraining is required for workers to move between sectors, or because capital investments in other sectors are required to absorb the newly available pool of labor. In the absence of further shocks, society’s optimal response is likely to have the unemployment rate decline gradually over time. This, arguably, is the type of shock that contributed significantly to the Great Recession — an unexpected decline in residential construction that resulted in an oversupply of labor and capital that has been difficult to successfully redeploy to other sectors. These three examples all illustrate a general result from the models that most contemporary economists use to analyze business cycles and monetary policy. In such models, there is a reference unemployment rate to which it’s most appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current policy. In general, that reference rate is a function of most of the shocks in the model. 5 The most common term for this reference rate is “the natural rate” of unemployment, although there is some variation among authors. There is a clear intuition for having the unemployment yardstick for monetary policy vary with economic conditions. Modern economies are buffeted by unanticipated disturbances. Even at their best, economies take time to adjust to those shocks. The pace of that adjustment is in turn affected by a variety of frictions in an economy ― frictions in the way firms determine the prices of their goods, frictions in the process of searching for the most promising opportunities to deploy available capital and labor resources, and frictions in the way workers and employers search for each other and determine wages, among others. Monetary policy is simply unable to offset all of the ways in which various frictions impede the economy’s adjustment to various shocks. The term ‘maximum employment’ should therefore be thought of as the level of employment that currently can be achieved by a central bank, taking into account its long-run objectives and the very real impediments to a more rapid adjustment to recent economic shocks. 4 From this perspective, some popular empirical practices are of dubious value for evaluating current monetary policy. For example, estimates of an older concept known as the “non- accelerating inflation rate of unemployment,” or “NAIRU,” are aimed at measuring the long-run normal unemployment rate. Estimates of NAIRU invariably impose the assumption that it varies only slowly and does not respond to many transitory shocks. Many other estimates of benchmark unemployment rates also impose conditions that prevent them from fluctuating with unanticipated economic shocks. These are reasonable strategies for estimating the long-run unemployment rate, but by design, they will fail to capture important variations in the natural rate, especially variations over the business cycle. Thus they will be incomplete and potentially misleading guides to policy and inflation dynamics in the short run. Estimating the natural rate of unemployment is difficult because it requires us to be as precise as possible about both the shocks that drive the behavior of the economy over time and the frictions that govern how the economy responds. The modern macroeconomic models most widely used for policy analysis specify and estimate those shocks and frictions, which allows one to make inferences about the current natural rate implied by the model. This approach leaves considerable uncertainty, since broadly similar models can still lead to different implications about the natural rate. Nonetheless, specifying an explicit model has the advantage of transparency regarding the range of judgments underlying any given estimate — you have to “put your cards on the table,” as it were. I see no good substitute for spelling out clear models if we’re to seriously assess the Fed’s performance on its maximum employment mandate. The FOMC’s statement on Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy 6 recognizes this distinction between the natural rate as an appropriate yardstick and the long-run unemployment concept. I will read from that statement. “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unemployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections.” The identification of maximum employment as driven by a range of real economic shocks lines up precisely with what I have been calling the natural unemployment rate. The longer-run normal rate of unemployment is a distinct concept, but one which informs Committee participants’ assessments of the maximum level of employment that’s relevant to current monetary policy. In principle, the natural rate could be close to the long-run unemployment rate, depending on the nature of shocks and frictions affecting the economy. Such alignment might be expected when an economic expansion is mature. But generally these rates will differ, particularly following significant economic disturbances or disruptions, when the natural rate could be well above the long-run rate, perhaps for a considerable period of time. 5 This distinction between the unemployment rate relevant to current policy and the unemployment rate we can expect in the longer run, absent further shocks, was critical to my decision to dissent from the most recent FOMC decision. The journey back to the long-run rate of unemployment is taking longer than we may have anticipated, and certainly longer than we would like. And the delay has meant significant hardships for many American families, make no mistake about it. But my assessment is that there are several impediments to more rapid growth that are likely to have significantly increased the natural rate. First, the housing market is still coping with the large inventory overhang that remains from the prerecession boom. This sector has begun to show some encouraging signs, with home prices and construction showing improvement this year. But housing investment is still quite low relative to historical norms, and it will continue to underperform until the demand for housing makes more progress catching up to the existing housing stock. Second, and related, was the significant shift in economic activity away from residential construction and related supply industries. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed. The resulting shift in the profile of available workers has meant that the reallocation and skill mismatch frictions affecting labor markets are at a relatively high level. Finally, the political gridlock that has delayed remedies to our unsustainable federal fiscal path has meant paralyzing uncertainty across the vast range of fiscal policy touch points in the economy. This appears to have seriously dampened investments and hiring for the new business ventures that typically would take up the economic slack caused by one sector’s decline. These forces are hard to quantify, but my sense, given an array of statistical analyses and a wide range of qualitative reports, is that labor market conditions have been held back by real impediments that are beyond the capacity of monetary policy to offset. The collapse in housing construction was a huge blow to our economy, and it will take a substantial amount of time for us to recover by shifting labor, capital and spending toward other growth opportunities. Thus, my assessment is that a reasonably strong case can be made that the natural rate of unemployment that corresponds to the Fed’s maximum employment mandate is now relatively elevated. Given this assessment, I dissented on the question of a new asset purchase program because, in such circumstances, further monetary stimulus runs the risk of raising inflation in a way that threatens the stability of inflation expectations. Recently, inflation has been running close to the Committee’s goal of 2 percent per year. In fact, over the last 20 years, inflation has averaged very close to 2 percent, despite significant quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year fluctuations. That track record appears to have given market participants some confidence in the Fed’s commitment to keep inflation around 2 percent going forward. Indeed, measures of inflation expectations have been remarkably stable over the last two decades. But that confidence should not be taken for granted. Perceptions that the Committee was focused on reducing unemployment at the expense of maintaining price stability would undercut that confidence and destabilize inflation. The consequences could be devastating, as we saw in the 1970s, when policymakers attempted to push unemployment below an estimate of the natural rate that was, in hindsight, mistakenly low. 7 6 It’s worth noting that when previous asset purchase programs were adopted in 2009 and 2010, the inflation outlook was significantly different than today. Back then, deflation appeared to be a very real possibility, so further accommodation, whatever it did for unemployment, also helped keep inflation closer to the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. The Committee’s statement also altered the “forward guidance” regarding future monetary policy, stating for the first time that it expected a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy for “a considerable period after the economic recovery strengthens.” I disagreed with this statement because I believe a commitment to provide stimulus beyond the point at which the recovery strengthens and growth increases implies too great a willingness to tolerate higher inflation and would be inconsistent with a balanced approach to the FOMC’s price stability and maximum employment mandates. Finally, I strongly opposed purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities. These purchases are intended to reduce borrowing rates for conforming home mortgages. Such purchases, as compared to purchases of an equivalent amount of U.S. Treasury securities, distort investment allocations and raise interest rates for other borrowers. Channeling the flow of credit to particular economic sectors is an inappropriate role for the Federal Reserve. Central banks abuse their independence when they promote some borrowers at the expense of others. This principle was recognized in the Joint Statement of the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve on March 23, 2009: “Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities,” that is, Congress and the administration. In conclusion, let me emphasize that monetary policy requires making tough calls and that, despite our differences, I have the utmost respect for my FOMC colleagues. Given their decision, I very much hope they are correct that substantial monetary stimulus aimed at hastening the reduction in unemployment will not raise the risk of destabilizing inflation. But given the uncertainty about the economic outlook, I am sure we will all be watching the incoming data with vigilance. 1 For a review of the history of the Fed’s mandate, see Aaron Steelman, “The Federal Reserve’s ‘Dual Mandate’: The Evolution of an Idea,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief, December 2011. 2 I am grateful to John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 3 Federal Reserve, Board of Governors, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” New and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 The analysis of such measures is complicated by the fact that labor force participation rates vary with labor market conditions, rising relative to trend when employment growth is strong and falling relative to trend when employment growth is weak or negative. Nonetheless, estimates of these relationships from historical data can be used to p roject labor force participation under the counterfactual of convergence in the absence of further shocks. 5 This point has been emphasized by Michael Woodford and others. See Michael Woodford, “Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,” Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, pp. 448-54. Many models abstract from labor market frictions and do not meaningfully model the unemployment rate. In these, there is nonetheless a meaningful measure of the output gap. Other models are rich enough to capture the unemployment rate in a meaningful way. 6 Federal Reserve, Board of Governors, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” New and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 7 Athanosios Orphanides and John C. Williams, “The Decline of Activist Stabilization Policy: Natural Rate Misperceptions, Learning and Expectations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 11, November 2005, pp. 1927-50.

1 Challenges to Economic Growth October 12, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond University of Virginia, Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy Charlottesville, Va. It’s a pleasure to be with you today. I seem to have lucked out with my timing. Not only am I able to join you in celebrating the five-year anniversary of the Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy, but I get to kick off homecoming weekend. I know some of you will be eager to get started, so I’ll try not to keep you too long. Today, I plan to share my perspectives on some of the economic challenges facing our country, and in doing so provide background on the Federal Reserve’s role on behalf of the nation’s economy. We, too, will be observing an important milestone soon, our centennial. But first, I should share our standard disclaimer ― that the views expressed in this talk are my own and are not necessarily shared by anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 To start, I’d like to say that I feel an affinity for the Batten School, although this is my first visit here. This is due in part to Gerry Warburg, your assistant dean. He spoke at a gathering at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond last year and then again to our Board of Directors last month. Warburg was quite enlightening regarding the overall political landscape and the political opportunities and pitfalls that may await the Fed in the years ahead. I was delighted to learn that he is related to Paul Warburg, the famous financier who 100 years ago championed the creation of our nation’s central bank. He helped author the first draft of the bill that would ultimately become the Federal Reserve Act, which was signed into law on December 23, 1913. Not only did Paul Warburg campaign for a central bank, he served on the Board of Governors in the Fed’s early years and wrote a detailed book explaining the operation of the Fed for the general public. 2 Anyone who has taken a good look at the Fed’s structure can appreciate why someone would see the need for a book explaining who the Fed is and what it does. I plan to say a bit more about our complicated structure in a moment. Another link to the Batten School is that I feel a bit of an indirect connection to Frank Batten Sr. himself. A man named Lemuel Lewis served as the chairman of the Richmond Fed board of directors a few years back, and he worked for Frank Batten at Landmark Media Enterprises for many years. (The company was formerly known as Landmark Communications.) Lem was quite generous with his praise for Frank Batten and spoke warmly of the tremendous difference he made in his professional and personal life. I can well understand why your school’s report uses the word “revered” regarding your school’s namesake. 2 Frank Batten’s vision for this school was to bring together teaching and research concerning the practice of leadership in the public policy realm. As a Reserve Bank president, it has been a unique privilege to be able to participate in such a unique American policy-making institution. I’ve had a ringside seat for, and at times have participated in, some of the most significant economic policy challenges of recent years. I’ve seen firsthand the enormous demands placed on the leaders of such policy institutions. So I heartily endorse the creation of educational institutions founded on this compelling vision. The notion that economic policy requires highly collaborative leadership skills will resonate with anyone with a good working knowledge of the Fed. Our nation’s monetary policy is entrusted to a relatively large deliberative body called the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which consists of 12 voting members. Seven are the members of the Fed’s Board of Governors, and five voting members are drawn on a rotating basis from the ranks of the 12 regional Reserve Bank presidents. 3 All 19 of us ― the seven governors and all 12 Reserve Bank presidents ― participate fully in each meeting. A word about the Reserve Banks. While the Board of Governors is a federal agency, the regional Reserve Banks are independently chartered banks empowered under the Federal Reserve Act to provide clearing and settlement services for our nation’s banking system and for the U.S. Treasury. In addition, Reserve Bank staff members supervise financial system entities on behalf of the Board of Governors and conduct economic research in support of the Fed’s monetary and financial policy mission. In all, the expenses associated with Reserve Bank operations total more than $3 billion. So you can see that leadership challenges within the Fed come in many varieties. The design of this collaborative structure was quite deliberate and reflected the vision of, among others, Carter Glass of Lynchburg, Va. Like Frank Batten Sr., Glass was a newspaper editor by trade. He also served in the U.S. House of Representatives and later in the U.S. Senate. While in the House in 1913, Glass led the effort to pass the Federal Reserve Act, and while in the Senate in the 1930s, he played a crucial role in Depression-era banking legislation, including the Banking Act of 1935, which established the FOMC. Glass insisted on a federated structure of geographically dispersed reserve banks so they would understand and remain connected to the diverse regional economies that make up our huge country. He strongly opposed the proposals of some ― including, I have to add, Paul Warburg ― that would have concentrated power in a single centralized financial institution. This federated structure ensures that a wide range of perspectives are brought to bear on policy questions. Moreover, the Fed’s structure blends public and private governance. Each Reserve Bank is overseen by its own Board of Directors consisting of private citizens, drawn from various walks of life. Each Reserve Bank president is appointed by his Board of Directors, subject to the approval of the Board of Governors. This provides a measure of insulation for monetary policy decision-making from the short-run pressures associated with electoral politics, and thereby allows a longer-term focus, which is essential for good monetary policy. Much that is distinctive about the Federal Reserve’s leadership culture derives, I believe, from our federated structure. It’s often observed that the Fed is an exceptionally collegial institution, 3 and that is quite consistent with my experience. You can see this in the transcripts of FOMC meetings, which are released to the public with a five-year lag. (They are posted on the Board’s website, federalreserve.org.) You’ll notice there is a certain gentile formality about the proceedings, so participants are referred to as, for example, “President Plosser,” “Governor Duke,” and so on. Ben Bernanke is addressed as “Mr. Chairman.” More substantively, reading the transcripts reveals the lengths to which the Committee goes to reach a workable consensus. Policy alternatives are circulated a week in advance, and participants are polled as to whether they span the range of plausible alternatives ― that is, could you support one of them? At the meeting, after a set of staff briefings, each participant provides an extensive statement on their views about the economy. Presidents usually include their views on economic conditions in their District. Another go-round follows in which participants express their views on policy alternatives. By the time the Chairman puts a proposal on the table, a workable consensus is generally clear. At times, this is followed by some surprisingly efficient collective wordsmithing, in which the language of the statement is tweaked here and there to better express the Committee’s intent. A final roll call concludes, and only then would an observer realize which participants were voters and which ones were not. This deliberative process is laborious and time-consuming and is supported by large staffs dedicated to research and analysis, both at the Board and the Reserve Banks. This makes sense in light of the potentially serious consequences of FOMC decisions for millions of Americans. But I also believe that our federated structure contributes to the strong sense of collegiality that pervades the Fed. The fact that the regional Reserve Bank presidents derive their authority from distinct independent governance bodies has a leveling effect on deliberations, I believe. As a result, FOMC participants expect their colleagues to bring their best independent judgments on the policy problems at hand and to listen thoughtfully to alternative perspectives. In my view, this results in a high-quality deliberative process. As a voting member of the FOMC this year, I have found myself at times within ― and at times outside ― the workable consensus and sometimes both at the same meeting! For example, I have agreed with the Committee’s decision to keep interest rates near zero, since our economy is growing at only a relatively modest pace. In such an environment, low interest rates and the corresponding monetary stimulus are needed to keep inflation from falling below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. On certain key points, however, I’ve disagreed with the Committee’s other voting members and as a result, I have dissented at all six FOMC meetings this year. Let me explain. At each meeting this year, the Committee has issued “forward guidance,” that is, language stating that economic conditions are likely to warrant a federal funds rate near zero for at least several years. I have objected to that language because it’s a highly imperfect way to communicate about future policy. Such language could be misinterpreted as suggesting a diminished commitment to keeping inflation at 2 percent. I would oppose adopting such a stance, and I do not believe my colleagues on the FOMC intended that interpretation. In addition, at its September meeting, the FOMC decided to begin increasing the size of its balance sheet by purchasing mortgage-backed securities. I believe that the benefits of that action 4 are likely to be small, because it’s unlikely to improve growth without also causing an unwelcome increase in inflation. At the same time, adding to our balance sheet increases the risks we’ll have to move quickly when the time comes to normalize monetary policy and begin raising rates. Finally, if we were to purchase more assets, I would’ve preferred to purchase Treasury securities rather than agency mortgage-backed securities. Buying mortgage backed securities rather than Treasuries may reduce borrowing rates for conforming home mortgages, but if so, it will raise interest rates for other borrowers and thus distort credit flows. This is an inappropriate role for the Fed, a principle that was recognized in the Joint Statement of the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve on March 23, 2009: “Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities,” that is, Congress and the administration. As I said, our economy is on a relatively sluggish path of recovery from the sharp contraction in activity that occurred in the Great Recession of 2008–09. We lost over 8 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. Since then, we’ve added about 4 1/4 million net new jobs, which leaves us far from a full recovery. Similarly, the unemployment rate rose from 5 percent at the end of 2007 to over 10 percent near the end of 2009. While the unemployment rate has fallen to 7.8 percent in the most recent report, the decline has been disappointingly slow. There are several factors that appear to be impeding a more rapid recovery in labor market conditions right now. First, the housing market is still coping with the large inventory overhang that remains from the prerecession boom. This sector has begun to show some encouraging signs, with home prices and construction improving this year. But housing investment is still quite low relative to historical norms, and it will continue to underperform until the demand for housing makes more progress catching up to the existing housing stock. Second, and related, was the significant shift in economic activity away from residential construction and related supply industries. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed. The resulting shift in the skill profile of available workers has meant that the reallocation and skill mismatch frictions affecting labor markets are at a relatively high level. Third, the Great Recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. The declines in income and wealth during the recent recession were far greater than in other recent recessions. As a result, consumers have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects, which have tempered the growth in consumer spending. Finally, the political gridlock that has delayed remedies to our unsustainable federal fiscal path has meant paralyzing uncertainty across the vast range of fiscal policy touch points in the economy. This appears to have seriously dampened investments and hiring for the new business ventures that typically would take up the economic slack caused by one sector’s decline. Should they all take effect, the spending cuts and tax increases that will automatically occur next year if Congress fails to act ― the so-called “fiscal cliff” ― will likely cause the economy to contract and move back into a recession. On the other hand, the longer-run federal fiscal outlook is a 5 significant imbalance between taxes and spending. I’m sure you are familiar with projections by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, showing that the outstanding stock of federal debt is likely to increase without bound as a ratio to gross domestic product. This is not a feasible scenario and cannot persist indefinitely. At some point Congress will have to align taxes and spending. The set of policy changes that could conceivably be adopted affect almost every American consumer or business in a meaningful way. So where do we go from here? My best guess is that growth will begin to firm later next year and continue to improve beyond that. While the recession in Europe poses risks for this outlook, I think those risks will likely dissipate next year as leaders work through the adjustments necessary for creating a new fiscal regime. As U.S. labor markets continue to heal, I expect household confidence to slowly firm and bolster consumer spending. The fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite promising, in my view, and are likely to reassert themselves in the years ahead. We have a proven ability to generate advances in scientific knowledge and commercial innovation. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well-educated populace, make this an excellent market in which to implement innovations. Our major challenge over the long haul is to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people, because growing our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb and John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Paul M. Warburg, “The Federal Reserve System.” New York: The Macmillan Company, 1930. 3 Under current law, the president of the New York Fed is a permanent voting member of the FOMC. The presidents of the Cleveland and Chicago Feds alternate yearly as voting members. The other presidents vote every three years.

1 Economic Outlook, October 2012 October 15, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Roanoke Regional Chamber of Commerce Policymakers Luncheon Roanoke, Va. It’s a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook and monetary policy. The Federal Reserve’s monetary policy received a great deal of media attention last month ― though perhaps not as much as the presidential election campaign or the performance of NFL referees. I’m OK with all of this attention because monetary policy plays an important role in fostering an environment in which people can work, save and invest to expand prosperity. But the role of monetary policy is often misunderstood, so in my remarks I will talk about what it can, and cannot, accomplish. I should emphasize that the views expressed in this talk are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 What does monetary policy do? First things first: Over the long haul, monetary policy determines the purchasing power of money. The Fed has an effective monopoly on the supply of certain critically important monetary assets ― namely, currency and bank reserves. That supply, together with the demand for such assets, determines their value. Excessive supply leads to excessive inflation ― that is, a rise in the overall price level. Insufficient supply leads to deflation ― that is, a fall in the overall price level. Excessive inflation — or deflation — therefore can legitimately be blamed on the central bank. Conversely, we deserve credit when inflation is low and stable. So how have we been doing? Some of you in this room probably remember the 1970s, when inflation was fairly high on average and at times reached double-digit rates. We fought hard to bring inflation under control in the 1980s and 1990s, and over the last 20 years, inflation has averaged 2.05 percent per year. 2 To be sure, inflation has varied from year to year. But these temporary swings have evened out over time, and inflation has generally run around 2 percent. In fact, over the last three years, inflation has averaged precisely 2 percent. The record of low and fairly stable inflation over the last two decades is a substantial improvement over previous decades, and it should be kept in mind whenever we think about monetary policy in recent years. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which is responsible for monetary policy, issued an important statement in January of this year on its “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” 3 In that document, the Committee stated that inflation 2 at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Fed’s statutory mandate. This confirmed a long-held belief among Fed watchers that 2 percent constituted the FOMC’s unofficial target for inflation. Beginning an economic outlook talk with a discussion of inflation is not the usual approach, even among Fed officials, perhaps due to the stability of inflation over the last 20 years. I did so simply to emphasize that the behavior of inflation is fundamentally attributable to the actions of the central bank, while growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide variety of factors outside the Fed’s control. So let’s talk about growth now. The Great Recession officially bottomed out at the end of the second quarter of 2009, but the expansion in economic activity since then has been disappointing. Real gross domestic product (GDP), for example, has grown at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent during this recovery. Labor market conditions have been particularly disheartening. We lost over 8 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. Since bottoming out in early 2010, we’ve added 4 ¼ million new jobs, which leaves us far from a complete recovery. The rate of job growth has been quite uneven over time. Thus job growth averaged 226,000 jobs per month in the first quarter, fell to 67,000 jobs per month in the second quarter and rebounded to 146,000 jobs per month in the third quarter. The most recent rate of job growth is fairly close to the average for this recovery, suggesting that the slowdown in the second quarter was a transitory swing. These labor markets indicators are especially noteworthy because Congress requires that monetary policy should “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates.” 4 Some observers see these labor market conditions as prima facie evidence that the Fed is failing to promote effectively the goal of maximum employment. In particular, many people point to how high the unemployment rate is now by historical standards. But assessing monetary policy is much more complicated than simply noting that certain indicators are far from historical averages. Modern economies are buffeted by unanticipated disturbances. Even at their best, economies take time to adjust to those shocks. The pace of that adjustment is, in turn, affected by a variety of frictions in an economy ― frictions in the way firms determine the prices of their goods, frictions in the process of searching for the most promising opportunities to deploy available capital and labor resources, and frictions in the way workers and employers search for each other, among others. Monetary policy is simply unable to offset all of the ways in which various frictions impede the economy’s adjustment to various shocks. The term “maximum employment” in our congressional mandate should therefore be thought of as the level of employment that currently can be achieved by a central bank, taking into account its long-run objectives and the very real impediments to a more rapid adjustment to recent economic shocks. Consider the severe recession we just experienced. An unanticipated decline in residential construction resulted in an oversupply of labor and capital. Redeploying those resources productively has been difficult and time-consuming: Retraining is often required for workers to find employment in other sectors, and capital investments are required to absorb the newly 3 available pool of labor in other sectors. In the absence of further shocks, the economy’s best response is likely to have the unemployment rate decline gradually over time. How gradually is the critical question. It’s unlikely that we would be able to restore the unemployment rate to its long-run level immediately ― within a quarter or two, for example. At the same time, there are significant social costs associated with delaying the recovery in labor market conditions too long. The key point here is that simply observing a high unemployment rate does not imply that the Fed’s monetary policy is failing to comply with its congressional mandate, nor does it necessarily mean that monetary policy needs to do more to achieve its goals. The FOMC was clear about this point in its January statement that I mentioned earlier, and I’d like to quote from that statement: “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments.” I believe there are several factors impeding a more rapid recovery in labor market conditions right now. First, the housing market is still coping with the large inventory overhang that remains from the prerecession boom. This sector has begun to show some encouraging signs, with home prices and construction improving this year. But housing investment has shrunk to a much smaller part of the overall economy than had typically been the case, and given the inventory overhang, residential investment is likely to remain below prerecession levels for a considerable period. Second, and related, was the significant shift in economic activity away from residential construction and related supply industries. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed. The result has been an adverse shift in the skill profile of available workers, which has intensified the reallocation and skill mismatch frictions that hinder labor market clearing. Third, the Great Recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. Prior to the recent recession, American households experienced a two-decade run with just two mild recessions in which job losses were relatively limited. In contrast, the declines in income and wealth during the recent recession were far greater. As a result, consumers have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects. So while consumer spending has grown during this recovery, the tempered pace of that growth has limited the overall pace of the expansion, relative to previous recoveries. Finally, our business contacts frequently emphasize that uncertainty is at a crippling level and has caused them to delay hiring and investment commitments. While there may be multiple sources of uncertainty, including the situation in Europe, the most widely mentioned is the nation’s fiscal policy. Here I’ll mention two aspects of the federal fiscal situation. One is the 4 fiscal cliff, the combination of spending cuts and tax increases that will automatically occur next year if Congress fails to act. The total size of these changes is such that, should they all take effect, the economy is likely to contract and move back into a recession. The second relevant aspect of the federal fiscal outlook is the long-run imbalance between taxes and spending. According to projections by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the deficit is likely to decline somewhat for a few years, but then move higher, both in dollar terms and as a fraction of GDP. This implies that the outstanding stock of federal debt will increase without bound as a ratio to GDP. This is not a feasible scenario and cannot persist indefinitely. At some point, Congress will have to align taxes and spending. The set of policy changes that are likely to be considered affect almost every American consumer or business in a meaningful way. Not knowing which of these policies will be adopted, a wide array of economic decision-makers is likely to be affected. Uncertainty is likely to continue to dampen U.S. growth until there is greater clarity about legislation that Congress and the president are likely to adopt. But merely avoiding the fiscal cliff is not likely to be enough. Fiscal uncertainty will continue to restrain growth, I believe, until Washington adopts a long-run plan that restores fiscal balance. In short, much of the recent sluggishness is understandable. Economies take time to recover from severe shocks. In fact, if you look back at how advanced economies typically behave after recessions associated with housing slumps, you will find that the current U.S. recovery is actually not out of the ordinary. 5 What is exceptional is the depth of the contraction phase of this recession. So where do we go from here? My best guess is that growth will begin to firm later next year and continue to improve beyond that. While the recession in Europe poses risks for this outlook, I think those risks will likely dissipate next year as leaders work through the adjustments necessary for creating a new fiscal regime. As U.S. labor markets continue to heal, I expect household confidence to slowly firm and bolster consumer spending. The fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite promising, in my view, and are likely to reassert themselves in the years ahead. We have a proven ability to generate advances in scientific knowledge and commercial innovation. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well-educated populace, make this an excellent market in which to implement innovations. Our major challenge over the long haul is to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people, because growing our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living. What is the role of the Fed’s monetary policy in this outlook? Our first responsibility is to keep inflation low and stable; this allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions without worrying about inflation. The FOMC took an important step to solidify confidence in our commitment to price stability with its January statement on “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy” formalizing a long-run goal for inflation of 2 percent. I strongly supported my colleagues’ decision to issue that statement, but I have dissented at all six FOMC meetings this year. Let me explain some of my reasoning. At each meeting this year, 5 the FOMC has voted to leave the federal funds rate near zero, and in each case, I supported that decision. But the Committee also issued “forward guidance,” that is, language stating that economic conditions are likely to warrant a federal funds rate near zero for at least several years. I have objected to that language because it’s a highly imperfect way to communicate about future policy. It could be misinterpreted as meaning that the Committee believes the economy will be weaker than people had thought. By itself, that could have a dampening effect on current activity, which is not what was intended. On the other hand, it also could be misinterpreted as suggesting a diminished commitment to keeping inflation at 2 percent. I would vigorously oppose adopting such a stance, and I do not believe my colleagues on the FOMC intended that interpretation either. In addition, at its September meeting, the FOMC decided to begin increasing the size of its balance sheet by purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities, or MBS. I believe that the benefits of that action are likely to be small, because it’s unlikely to improve growth without also causing an unwelcome increase in inflation. At the same time, adding to our balance sheet increases the risk we will have to move quickly when the time comes to normalize monetary policy and begin raising rates. Finally, if we are going to purchase more assets, it would be better to purchase Treasury securities rather than agency mortgage-backed securities. Buying MBS rather than Treasuries may reduce borrowing rates for conforming home mortgages, but if so, it will raise interest rates for other borrowers and thus distort credit flows. This is an inappropriate role for the Fed, a principle that was recognized in the Joint Statement of the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve on March 23, 2009: “Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities,” that is, Congress and the administration. To sum up, I am cautiously optimistic about the outlook for growth in output and employment. While I have objected to some specific monetary policy decisions, the fact that inflation has stayed around 2 percent is evidence that monetary policy has done reasonably well in recent years. Maintaining that record of success should be our focus in the years ahead. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb and John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 For an account, see Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A Twentieth Century Odyssey.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 83, no. 1. pp. 1-22. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” New and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 For a review of the history of the Fed’s mandate, see Aaron Steelman, “The Federal Reserve’s ‘Dual Mandate’: The Evolution of an Idea,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief, December 2011. 5 Greg Howard, Robert Martin and Beth Anne Wilson, “Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers, no. 1037, November 2011. See in particular Figure 12 on page 24. The current U.S. recovery is within one standard error of the average advanced economy recovery from recessions that occur during housing slumps.

Economic Outlook November 15, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond West Virginia Economic Outlook Conference Charleston, W.Va. It’s a pleasure to be with you this morning to discuss the economic outlook. I’ll be talking about the prospects for real economic growth for the United States as a whole, but I’ll also share some observations about West Virginia’s economy, which, as you all know, has some very special features. One aspect of the economic outlook in which many people have a keen interest is the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy. This makes sense, since it plays an important role in fostering an environment in which people can work, save and invest to expand prosperity. But the role of monetary policy is often overstated, so in my remarks I will talk about what it can, and cannot, accomplish. I should emphasize that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 Monetary policy is primarily about inflation, so let me begin with an overview of the inflation situation. Over the last 20 years, inflation has averaged 2.07 percent per year. To be sure, inflation has varied from year to year. But these temporary swings have evened out over time, and inflation has tended to return to around 2 percent. In fact, over the last three years, inflation has averaged 2.06 percent. Although the inflation rate has been elevated in recent months because of the recent bulge in retail gasoline prices, most economists are expecting headline inflation to average about 2 percent, or a little less, over the next year or two. I agree with that outlook. The record of low and fairly stable inflation over the last two decades is a substantial improvement over previous decades, and it should be kept in mind whenever we think about monetary policy in recent years. 2 The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC (the group that determines monetary policy), issued an important statement in January on its “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.”3 In that document, the Committee stated that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. This confirmed a long-held belief among Fed watchers that 2 percent constituted the FOMC’s unofficial target for inflation. Beginning an economic outlook talk with a discussion of inflation is not the usual approach, even among Fed officials. I did so simply to emphasize that the behavior of inflation is fundamentally attributable to the actions of the central bank. Over the long haul, monetary policy determines the purchasing power of money. Central banks have a monopoly on the supply of certain critically important monetary assets, namely currency and bank reserves. That supply, together with the 2 demand for those assets, determines their value. An excessive supply leads to inflation ― that is, a rise in the overall price level. Similarly, an insufficient supply leads to deflation ― that is, a fall in the overall price level. Excessive inflation ― or deflation ― can therefore legitimately be blamed on the central bank. Conversely, the central bank should get credit when inflation is low and stable. While U.S. inflation is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve, real economic growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide range of factors outside the Fed’s control. Even at their best, modern economies take time to adjust to unanticipated shocks, and our economy was hit with a very large shock when residential construction collapsed. The pace of adjustment is, in turn, affected by a variety of frictions in the economy ― frictions in the way firms determine the right prices of their goods, frictions in the process of searching for the most promising opportunities to deploy newly available capital and labor resources, and frictions in the way workers and employers search for each other, among others. Monetary policy is simply unable to offset all of the ways in which various frictions impede the economy’s adjustment to various shocks. It’s unfortunate, but the effects of monetary stimulus on real output and employment are less than is widely thought; they consist largely of the transitory byproducts of frictions that delay the timely adjustment of prices to changes in monetary conditions. Let’s turn to the growth outlook now. The Great Recession officially bottomed out at the end of the second quarter of 2009, but the expansion in economic activity since then has been disappointing. Real gross domestic product (GDP), for example, has risen at an average annual rate of 2.16 percent during this recovery. Labor market conditions have been especially disheartening. We lost over 8 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath; since bottoming out in early 2010, we’ve added 4.5 million new jobs, which leaves us far from a complete recovery. In West Virginia, labor market conditions followed a similar path during the recession, although the timing of the job loss lagged the national trend by several months. The state lost over 25,000 jobs from the peak of employment to the trough reached in early 2010. Since then, the recovery has seen just one-third of those jobs added back. Labor market conditions have weakened in recent months, and the unemployment rate here has climbed now for five consecutive months, bucking the national trend. Recent job losses have been concentrated in the energy sector, no doubt reflecting depressed prices for coal and natural gas, as well as the fallout from shifting regulatory regimes. Several factors appear to have impeded a more rapid recovery in the U.S. economy. First, by the end of the housing boom, we had built many more new homes than we truly needed. The resulting inventory overhang has led to a large and persistent decline in new residential investment. It now looks as if the worst is behind us and new construction activity is gradually improving. Moreover, home prices in many markets have bottomed out and begun to increase. That said, residential investment is still less than 2.8 percent of GDP, versus 6.2 percent back in 2005. We still have not seen the rapid rebound in housing that has often contributed to swift recoveries in overall economic activity in the past. Given the extent of housing oversupply that developed just before the recession, we probably should not expect housing markets to boom the way they did in many places in the past. 3 A second, and related, factor behind the slow recovery was the significant shift in economic activity away from residential construction, housing finance and related supply industries. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed, and it has taken considerable time to whittle down the unemployment rate. In part, this was predictable; it often requires significant retraining for laid-off workers to find new employment in other sectors of the economy. In addition, capital investment is often required when workers move to new sectors. Thus unemployment can remain elevated for a long and frustrating interval following a severe shock. Third, the Great Recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. Prior to the recent recession, American households experienced a two-and-a-half-decade run with just two mild recessions in which job losses were relatively limited. In contrast, the declines in income and wealth during the recent recession were far more severe. As a result, consumers have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects. So while consumer spending has grown during this recovery, the tempered pace of that growth has limited the overall pace of the expansion, relative to previous recoveries. Finally, for most of this year, our business contacts have been emphasizing that uncertainty has caused them to delay hiring and investment commitments. While their uncertainty may have multiple sources, including the situation in Europe, the most widely mentioned source is the nation’s fiscal policy. Here I’ll mention two aspects of the federal fiscal situation. One is the fiscal cliff, the combination of spending cuts and tax increases that will automatically occur next year if Congress fails to act. The total size of these changes is such that, should they all take effect and remain in effect for a considerable period, the economy is likely to contract and move back into recession. The second relevant aspect of the federal fiscal outlook is the long-run imbalance between taxes and spending. According to projections by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the deficit is likely to decline somewhat for a few years, but then move higher, both in dollar terms and as a fraction of GDP. This implies that the outstanding stock of federal debt will increase without bound as a ratio to GDP. This is not a feasible scenario and it cannot persist indefinitely. At some point Congress will have to bring taxes and spending into closer alignment. The set of policy choices that are likely to be considered would affect almost every household or business in a meaningful way. Until a fiscal plan is adopted that is sustainable over the longer run, consumers and businesses will make decisions under a cloud of uncertainty. In short, much of the recent sluggishness is understandable. Economies take time to recover from severe shocks. In fact, if you look back at how advanced economies have typically behaved following recessions associated with housing slumps, you will find that our current recovery is actually not out of the ordinary. 4 What is exceptional about the current recovery is the depth of the contraction that preceded it. But what does the future hold for our economy? My best guess is that growth will continue into next year at an annual rate of 2 percent or above. Toward the end of 2013, we should see growth begin to firm with further improvement beyond that. Several important suppositions lie behind 4 that forecast, however. First, I expect to see meaningful progress on federal budget issues now that the election is behind us. As I mentioned a moment ago, it will not be enough to simply sidestep the fiscal cliff. To meaningfully reduce the uncertainty about tax and spending policy that is discouraging private sector commitments, we will have to see convincing progress toward a sustainable long-run trajectory for federal policy. Giving the proverbial can a few more kicks down the road is likely to mean continued uncertainty and further disappointment with labor markets. Second, while the European recession and fiscal challenges pose risks to the U.S. outlook, I expect those risks to diminish next year. European growth has been dampened by the strains of constructing a new collective fiscal regime while coping with the aftermath of the previous regime. But despite repeated visits to the brink of financial disorder, eurozone policymakers have made notable progress toward new institutional arrangements. To date, the impact on U.S. exports has been manageable and the spillover to U.S financial institutions and markets has been limited. Third, my outlook is predicated on a continuation of the gradual improvement we’ve seen in household confidence about future income prospects. Improvements in labor market effectiveness and modest growth in home prices should combine to reduce consumer apprehension about downside risks and thereby bolster spending. Finally, this outlook is built on the usual assumption of no unanticipated shocks. Indeed, by definition, it would be hard to forecast any other way. Significant energy price increases would tend to temporarily reduce overall growth, although they ultimately would be likely to stimulate exploration and new production. An unexpected downturn in growth among our major trading partners also has the potential to impede U.S. growth. On the other hand, a stronger-than- expected resurgence in confidence is not inconceivable; rapid and convincing progress toward fiscal sustainability, for example, might release a rush of pent-up spending. Even though growth has been below our long-run trend rate since the recession, I believe that the fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite strong. Increases in real income ultimately depend on the implementation of new products and services and new ways of providing existing products and services. We have a proven ability to generate advances in scientific knowledge and new commercial applications. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well-educated population, make this an exceptional place to implement innovations. Our major challenge over the longer haul is to find effective ways to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people, because expanding our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living. In short, I am cautiously optimistic about the near-term outlook and see grounds for more optimism about longer-run growth prospects. What role does monetary policy play in this outlook? Our primary responsibility at the Federal Reserve is to keep inflation low and stable; this allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions without needing to worry about inflation. The FOMC took an important step to solidify confidence in our commitment to price stability with its January statement on 5 “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy,” which formalized a long-run goal for inflation of 2 percent. Having stated that goal, it’s incumbent upon us to follow through with policy actions that are consistent with maintaining 2 percent inflation. Beyond hitting our inflation target, though, it’s not clear whether monetary policy, by itself, can bring about any material improvement in economic growth right now. The Fed is currently increasing the quantity of reserves held by the banking system by buying securities ― both long- term U.S. Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities. In my view, the supply of bank reserves is already quite ample and is certainly large enough to support a strengthening recovery. At the same time, it’s important for us to remember that we cannot continually buy more securities and create more bank reserves without jeopardizing our inflation goal. Accordingly, I have opposed additional easing steps at FOMC meetings this year. My main concern is that we have eased policy aggressively for over four years; at some point, the growth outlook will improve enough that the FOMC will need to begin raising interest rates and reducing the supply of bank reserves in order to preserve the price stability that we have enjoyed over the last 20 years. As a technical matter, I do believe that we have the tools we need to withdraw accommodation soon enough and rapidly enough to keep inflation on target. But as a practical matter, we are in uncharted territory, and that will make it difficult to get the timing just right. In the Fed’s 99-year history, we have never eased monetary policy as aggressively as we have over the last few years. The larger our balance sheet when the time comes to withdraw monetary stimulus, the more difficult and risky that process will be. In my view, the balance of considerations suggests that we should be standing pat now rather than easing policy further. One other aspect of Fed policy is unprecedented right now, besides the sheer size of our balance sheet. Until this recession, we have generally restricted ourselves to purchasing U.S. Treasury securities. But as I noted, we also have been buying mortgage-backed securities, most recently at a pace of about $40 billion per month. This raises broad concerns that ought to worry us. Buying mortgage-backed securities rather than U.S. Treasuries may reduce borrowing rates for conforming home mortgages, but if so, it will raise interest rates for other borrowers ― such as small businesses. I have yet to see a convincing case for distorting markets by channeling credit toward housing debt and away from other sectors. Moreover, this is an inappropriate role for the Fed, a principle that was recognized in the Joint Statement of the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve on March 23, 2009: “Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities,” that is, Congress and the administration. As I said earlier, our main responsibility at the Federal Reserve is price stability. On that score the situation is reasonably good, with inflation averaging quite close to our 2 percent objective in recent years. Our focus should be maintaining our record of success. That would be the best contribution we can make to the economic outlook. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb, John Weinberg and Ann Macheras for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 For an account see Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A Twentieth Century Odyssey.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 1-22. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” News and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?” International Finance Discussion Papers, November 2011, no. 1037. See in particular Figure 12, page 6 24. The current recovery is within one standard error of the average advanced economy recovery from recessions that occur during housing slumps.

1 Perspectives on Monetary and Credit Policy November 20, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Shadow Open Market Committee Symposium New York, N.Y. The Federal Open Market Committee in January formally announced a numerical objective for inflation, a step which has long been argued to be essential to anchoring longer-term expectations about the conduct of monetary policy.1 So it might seem a bit surprising, as this year draws to a close, to find a member of the Committee speaking at an event whose title is “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Adrift.” But on further reflection, I don’t think it should be surprising at all. Both the FOMC’s articulation of an inflation target and the sense that policy is adrift are related, I believe, to the extraordinary circumstances and resulting policy actions of the last few years. In my remarks this morning, I will discuss two dimensions of Federal Reserve policy that came in the wake of the financial crisis and Great Recession: first, the effort to provide stimulus and policy guidance at the zero bound; and second, the expansion of the scope of Fed policy beyond monetary policy to a broader engagement in credit policy. Before I begin, however, I need to recite a disclaimer that should be quite familiar to members of the Shadow Open Market Committee — my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of any other members of the FOMC.2 Maintaining Credibility Let me begin by noting that when the FOMC announced an explicit numerical objective for inflation this year, we had experienced an extended period of relative monetary stability. Specifically, since December of 1993, inflation (as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures) has averaged very close to 2 percent per year — a very good performance when compared against previous decades. To be sure, that performance has not been perfect; inflation averaged over 3 percent for the five years from mid-2003 to mid-2008, a subpar outcome for which we at the Fed should accept responsibility. Nevertheless, despite such swings, inflation has generally tended to return to around 2 percent, and this appears to have enhanced public confidence in the Fed’s willingness and ability to keep inflation low and stable. Critical to that process was the Fed’s demonstrated determination to act preemptively against inflationary pressures over the last three decades, particularly in 1994, an episode to which I will return. 3 This period of relative success on our implicit inflation objective helped make the announcement of an explicit numerical inflation objective in the January statement possible. Actions speak louder than words, after all, and without having seen the Fed take action to preempt inflation, 2 mere words might have done little, by themselves, to bolster credibility. The clear statement of the FOMC’s monetary policy objective was still important, though, to help dispel lingering doubts about the Committee’s intentions and to provide a clear benchmark for accountability. Implicit in the Fed’s credibility is some measure of public understanding of how the Fed will typically respond to changes in economic circumstances. That understanding no doubt depends heavily on the Fed’s observed responses over the last 20 years or more, but the postwar historical record does not include any extended periods in which the Fed’s target interest rate was effectively at the zero lower bound. As a consequence, uncertainty about future Fed policy actions is bound to be greater now than in a more typical interest rate environment. This provides a compelling reason, in my view, for the FOMC to attempt to provide greater guidance about future policy conduct. The recent appearance of drift in policy may be attributable to the Committee’s search for more effective ways to communicate about future policy in a relatively unique setting. Communicating Policy Actions The most recent innovation in communication has been the use of a calendar date rather than a qualitative phrase to characterize the time period over which the Committee anticipates interest rates will be exceptionally low. Specifically, the Committee said in August 2011 that it “currently anticipates that economic conditions … are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate through at least mid-2013.” At subsequent meetings, “mid-2013” was changed to “late 2014,” and then “mid-2015.” The minutes of the August 2011 meeting said that the Committee viewed the change in language as “a shift toward more accommodative policy,” implying a desire to shift the yield curve downward. The language of the statement, however, was phrased as simply a forecast of future Committee behavior. The current formulation of the forward guidance raises the question: How can a change in the forecast of future policy settings also be a shift to more accommodative policy? Indeed, market participants have seemed confused about the extent to which the forward guidance represents a commitment. Committee members have emphasized in public statements that the time frame should be viewed as contingent on incoming data. But describing the forward guidance language as “a shift to more accommodative policy” seems to imply that the Committee intends to choose policy settings in the future in a way they would not otherwise see fit at that time. The lack of clarity about forward guidance has contributed to a problem highlighted by Michael Woodford — namely, that observers may misinterpret a change in the forward guidance date as a pessimistic shift in the Committee’s assessment of the drivers of economic growth rather than as a clarification of its reaction function. 4 Experimentation with more explicit forward guidance has been motivated by suggestions from some economists that the Fed can make current policy more stimulative by assuring the public that it will keep its interest rate target at the zero bound longer than it would if it were following its normal pattern of behavior. 5 It’s not clear whether this mechanism can work, however, without raising expected inflation over some horizon.6 Adopting such a strategy without compromising longer-term credibility may be feasible in model environments, where absolute credibility can easily be assumed. In practice, however, a central bank’s credibility is often 3 contingent and incomplete. My reading of recent history is that the Fed’s credibility is not so unassailable that inflation expectations can be dialed up for a time and then easily dialed back to price stability. At the very least, the precedent set by an opportunistic attempt to raise inflation temporarily is likely to cloud our credibility for decades to come. It should be unobjectionable, however, to provide forward guidance that reduces unnecessary uncertainty about the central bank’s reaction function and thereby helps people make better predictions about future monetary policy. For example, the Committee could provide some sense of the economic conditions under which it’s likely to begin raising rates and reducing the size of its balance sheet. But it’s important to avoid spurious precision. Some of my colleagues have suggested that the Committee provide specific numerical thresholds to help characterize future policy. For example, they suggest that the Committee state that interest rates will be exceptionally low at least until the unemployment rate falls below some specific number, as long as inflation is projected to be close to the Committee’s 2 percent objective, and inflation expectations remain stable. This approach would place great weight on a single indicator of labor market conditions, one that can easily lead you astray. This risk seems particularly germane now, given the difficulty of disentangling the trend and cyclical components of labor force participation. The January statement in which the Committee announced its 2 percent inflation objective also explained that “[the] Committee considers a wide range of indicators” in assessing labor market conditions. Crisp numerical thresholds may work well in the classroom models used to illustrate policy principles, but one or two economic statistics do not always capture the rich array of policy- relevant information about the state of the economy. Proponents of numerical thresholds sometimes reply to this criticism by citing the inflation “safety valve” clause that says: “as long as inflation is projected to be close to the Committee’s 2 percent objective and inflation expectations remain stable.” They argue that if a poorly specified unemployment threshold caused us to hold interest rates low for too long, inflation expectations would rise and a rate increase would be indicated. This strikes me as an inadequate defense because it essentially requires that we lose a measure of credibility before it can be invoked. Our policy should strive to maintain the stability of inflation expectations. At times, this requires a preemptive tightening of monetary policy, before inflation expectations have deteriorated or inflation has surged. In February 1994, for example, the FOMC began tightening monetary policy, despite well-behaved inflation and an unemployment rate over 7 percent. 7 Purchasing Assets In addition to forward guidance, the FOMC’s other main initiative at the zero bound has been asset purchases, with the most recent installment being the purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities that began after the September meeting. Back in 2009, I fully supported the first wave of purchases of U.S. Treasury securities because it was clear that heightened uncertainty had increased the demand for safe liquid assets, such as reserve account balances. Furnishing an elastic supply of central bank liabilities in that instance helped prevent deflation. 4 Since then, the FOMC’s asset purchase programs have increasingly focused on altering the composition of the Fed’s asset holdings in order to affect the net public supply of assets with particular characteristics and thereby affect their relative prices. The idea is that some type of market segmentation breaks the standard arbitrage relationships that would generally keep various asset prices aligned. Thus, purchases of longer-term Treasury securities are thought to reduce the slope of the yield curve, and purchases of mortgage-backed securities, or MBS, are thought to reduce their spreads over comparable Treasuries. There is ample room for skepticism about the effect of the Fed’s asset purchases on asset returns. A broad array of investors seems to be capable of operating across multiple asset markets, and the markets in which the Fed has been active tend to be relatively broad and deep. Moreover, the empirical evidence on the effects of Fed asset purchases, which is based on yield movements around the announcements of asset purchases, is ambiguous, given the difficulty of parsing policy signals from pure supply effects. When the Fed expands reserves by buying private assets, it extends public sector credit to private borrowers. To the extent that purchases of private claims have any effect, they do so by distorting the relative cost of credit among different borrowers. Such differential effects are unlikely to be beneficial, on net, unless borrowers in the favored sector would otherwise face artificially high rates. I think it’s difficult to make this case for agency MBS, a sector that historically has benefited from heavy subsidies, which arguably contributed to dangerously high homeowner leverage. So I do not see the rationale for reducing the interest rates paid by conforming home mortgage borrowers relative to those paid by, say, small-business borrowers. Moreover, purchasing agency MBS encourages the continuation of a housing finance model based heavily on government-sponsored enterprises, at a time when the housing sector would be better served by a new model that relies less on government credit subsidies. Credit Market Intervention The pattern of Federal Reserve credit market intervention has evolved over time. The most recent articulation of an explicit credit policy, as such, is the Joint Statement of the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve of March 23, 2009, which stated that “[government] decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities.” This expresses well the core idea of a “credit accord” that Professor Marvin Goodfriend first advocated many years ago while at the Richmond Fed, and that I and others have endorsed. 8 The apparent contradiction between the March 2009 Treasury-Fed statement and the FOMC’s recent interventions to steer credit to the housing market also may be contributing to the perception that Federal Reserve credit policy is adrift. Uncertainty regarding Fed credit policy has precedents, whether it involves direct lending or purchases of private sector assets. For several decades prior to the recent crisis, policy regarding lending to financially stressed firms was often characterized by “constructive ambiguity.” 9 Financial firms and their creditors were encouraged to believe they would not be rescued in the event of distress, while officials preserved their ability to intervene should a crisis actually arise. Constructive ambiguity sought to obtain the ex-ante incentive benefits of commitment without giving up the discretion to act freely ex post. But taking their cues from central bank actions 5 rather than its words, market participants’ expanded their reliance on implied commitments of central bank liquidity support. This created excruciating dilemmas in times of stress, as was vividly illustrated during 2008: Disappoint short-term creditors and massive investor realignment destabilizes markets; rescue short-term creditors and the additional precedent reinforces expectations of future rescues and further intensifies moral hazard. Constructive ambiguity became increasingly hopeless in the face of accumulating instances of intervention, and the toxicity of credit policy opacity is now quite clear. Financial stability is likely to remain elusive without constraints on ad hoc rescues of firms facing financial stress. Unconstrained credit policy thus poses a thorny problem for the modern central bank, as Professor Goodfriend has forcefully argued. 10 Independent management of their balance sheet is essential to a central bank’s ability to conduct monetary policy in a way that is relatively free of the short-term pressures associated with electoral politics. But an immediate consequence of a central bank’s independence is the capacity to use its balance sheet to direct the flow of credit toward particular market segments, circumventing the constitutional checks and balances that would otherwise apply to such fiscal initiatives. Marvin Goodfriend and my predecessor, Al Broaddus, writing in 1994, warned that central bank forays into fiscal policy would be perceived as redistributional and would risk entanglement in partisan politics. The political backlash following the Federal Reserve’s 2008 actions, I believe, validates their concerns. The reactive evolution of Fed credit policy over recent decades parallels the way monetary policy drifted into instability during the 1960s and 1970s. 11 The process of solving the inherent time consistency problem and restoring monetary stability was long and costly. Legislative and constitutional solutions were proposed, but success depended on the Fed itself making price stability a priority and culminated with the FOMC’s adoption of the self-imposed constraint of a numerical inflation target. Limiting Central Bank Lending The process of establishing credible limits on central bank lending could be even more difficult than the pursuit of price stability. Whether self-imposed lending constraints could be effective remains to be seen. One approach would be for the Fed to operationalize the principles articulated in the March 2009 Joint Statement of the Treasury and the Fed. The alternative to self-imposed restraint is legislative action. The Dodd-Frank Act pared back the Fed’s ability to lend beyond the banking system by limiting the Fed’s so-called “13(3)” powers to lend to nondepository firms in “unusual and exigent circumstances.” These restrictions are modest, however. One could imagine legislation that limits the Fed to a narrowly defined set of ordinary lending activities — very short -term lending to sound, solvent banks, against good collateral, at rates above interbank market rates. If the Federal Reserve cannot limit credit policy of its own accord, legislation may be the best option. And the restraint of credit policy would not be complete unless limits on reserve bank lending are complemented by limits on the Fed’s ability to buy private sector assets. Expansive central bank lending has its supporters, and some are likely to argue that such restraints would inhibit performance of the “lender of last resort function” that is traditionally thought to be an essential central bank role. Professor Goodfriend is persuasive, I believe, in 6 demonstrating that this is a misreading of the historical record. A century ago, central bank lending was thought of primarily as a means of rapidly increasing the supply of paper bank notes when the demand for those notes surged, either in connection with seasonal agricultural cycles or in connection with financial panics in which depositors sought to convert their deposits into currency. This is consistent with the purpose of the Federal Reserve Act, which, according to the preamble, is “to furnish an elastic currency.” 12 I will conclude by noting a theme that runs through both the monetary and credit sections of my remarks: humility. Central banks are at times asked to do too much — and at times they ask themselves to do too much. Given their fiscal independence and their historically expansive authority, one can see why people look to central banks as public-sector benefactors. But central bank success arguably has been associated more with restraint than ambition. The Fed tamed inflation when it backed away from overly ambitious notions of the role monetary policy could play in labor market outcomes. I believe that future financial stability will depend similarly on central bank modesty about its ability to redirect credit flows constructively. The independence and effectiveness of the modern central bank will require limiting aspirations. 1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” News and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 2 I am grateful to John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 3 Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A Twentieth Century Odyssey,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 1-22. 4 Michael Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest Rate Lower Bound.” Delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 2012 Jackson Hole Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 31, 2012. 5 Woodford, 2012. Also, Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Liquidity Trap.” Presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2004, pp. 75-144, National Bureau of Economics, 2006. 6 Ivan Werning, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper 17344, August 2011. Werning writes that forward commitment can raise current growth even if prices are so sticky that there is no effect on inflation. If prices are not perfectly fixed, however, commitment to greater future stimulus raises inflation. 7 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Open Market Committee, Greenbook , February 1994; and Robert Hetzel, “The Monetary Policy of the United States: A History” (New York, NY, Cambridge University Press, 2008, chapter 15). 8 Marvin Goodfriend, “Why We Need an ‘Accord’ for Federal Reserve Credit Policy: A Note,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, August 1994, v. 26, no. 3, pp. 572-80. This was also printed in the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly special issue on the 50th anniversary of the Treasury-Fed Accord, 2001. Also Jeffrey Lacker, “Government Lending and Monetary Policy.” Speech at the National Association for Business Economics 2009 Washington Economic Policy Conference, Alexandria, VA, March 2, 2009; and Charles Plosser, “Ensuring Sound Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of the Crisis.” Speech at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 27, 2009. 9 Marvin Goodfriend and Jeffrey Lacker, “Limited Commitment and Central Bank Lending,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 1999, v. 85, n. 4. Also Lacker, “Reflections on Economics, Policy, and the Financial Crisis.” Speech to the Kentucky Economics Association, Lexington, KY, September 24, 2010. 10 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Ellusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, discussion paper 12-E-09, September 2012. 11 Goodfriend and Lacker (1999). 12 Elmus Wicker, “The Great Debate on Banking Reform: Nelson Aldrich and the Origins of the Fed” (Columbus, OH, Ohio State University Press, 2005).
