Remarks at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar October 3, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It’s my pleasure to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to participate in the 40th anniversary of our Central Banking Seminar. This year we have 140 participants representing 67 different countries and institutions. The program is designed to provide a broad view of central banking covering the key areas of monetary policy, supervision, payments and financial stability. This design reflects our belief that a well-rounded perspective can help us to be more effective in our jobs as central bankers. We also hope this program provides you with an opportunity during your stay to broaden your network of central bank colleagues. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The theme of this year’s seminar is the policy challenges we face in an environment of sluggish economic growth and low inflation. Central bankers will always be confronted by challenges in carrying out their responsibilities, which will change over time. This puts a premium on our ability to adapt. Consider, for example, the contrast between the issues faced by the Federal Reserve in 1976—the inaugural year of our seminar—and today. In 1976, the U.S. economy was recovering from the first oil price shock and the ensuing recession, which had ended in March 1975. The FOMC faced the problem of stagflation, as both inflation and unemployment were high—inflation was running around 6 percent and the unemployment rate was nearly 8 percent. The FOMC’s policy rate—the federal funds rate—was about 5 percent. Compare that to today’s circumstances. The U.S. economy has entered its eighth year of expansion following the financial crisis and the Great Recession. In contrast to 1976, inflation has been below the FOMC’s desired level of 2 percent for most of this expansion. This year, inflation is running at about 1 percent and the unemployment rate is 4.9 percent. Monetary policy remains accommodative, with the target range for the federal funds rate at 0.25-0.50 percent. I doubt that a central banker in 1976 would have viewed the current set of circumstances as even remotely plausible, or would have ever contemplated the types of challenges that we now face. In my remarks today, I would like to briefly touch on four topics: (1) the efficacy of monetary policy at the zero lower bound, (2) central bank communications, (3) cyber risk, and (4) market liquidity and regulation. These have particular relevance for central banks today, and are likely to remain relevant in the years ahead. The speakers that you will hear over the course of our program will elaborate on some of these topics. The financial crisis severely impaired the global financial system, and the resulting recession in the United States was the most severe since the Great Depression. Based in part on the lessons of the Japanese experience, in which falling inflation expectations undermined the effectiveness of monetary policy, the FOMC responded aggressively as the economy weakened. It began cutting the policy rate from 5.25 percent in September 2007 and reached the effective zero lower bound in December 2008. From that point on, the FOMC turned to unconventional monetary policy in order to provide additional stimulus to the economy. Academic research indicates that recoveries following financial crises have tended to be shallow and protracted. 2 One plausible reason for this pattern is that a financial crisis typically results in headwinds that take time to dissipate—for example, the deleveraging of business and household balance sheets or the tightening of credit standards. Even so, as the expansion failed to gather momentum and persistently underperformed most forecasts, alternative explanations for the sluggish economic growth―such as secular stagnation―began to receive increased attention. Wednesday’s session on Global Trends and Risks will more fully explore this debate. The insights from this debate have important implications for the appropriate path for monetary policy and the question of whether monetary policymakers need additional tools or greater support from the fiscal authorities to avoid being trapped at the zero lower bound for interest rates. Beyond these factors, the tepid pace of the expansion reflects the fact that monetary policy was constrained by the zero lower bound. Monetary policy affects the economy mainly through its influence on financial market conditions—including long-term interest rates, credit spreads, exchange rates and equity prices. However, when the policy rate hits zero, conventional policy is constrained in terms of providing additional accommodation―even recognizing that some central banks have pushed short-term rates into negative territory. To overcome such constraints, the FOMC used forward guidance—promising to keep rates low for longer—and asset purchases to provide additional stimulus to the economy. Given the initial novelty of unconventional monetary policy tools, central banks did not have a well-developed body of research to draw on to design the programs and calibrate their impact. While it will take time to build this body of work, research to date varies in terms of the estimated effectiveness of unconventional policy. Several studies indicate that the FOMC’s first asset purchase program helped to reduce long-term interest rates, while the subsequent programs had smaller though still significant effects on rates. However, Professor Summers, who is participating in our program, has recently questioned the effectiveness of the Fed’s asset purchase programs when financial markets are well-functioning. 3 There is a related concern given that the federal funds rate is still close to zero at this point in the expansion. While I’m on record as saying that expansions do not simply die of old age, 4 some economists are concerned that the risk of a recession is increasing. As I indicated earlier, the FOMC was able to reduce the federal funds rate by more than 5 percentage points in an effort to offset the effects of the last recession. If another recession were to happen in the next few years, it is likely that the FOMC would be unable to respond with a cut of such magnitude. In this case, the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy in providing accommodation would again become a central issue, as Chair Yellen discussed in her recent Jackson Hole speech. 5 A risk management approach to monetary policy would suggest that the more concerned one is with the effectiveness of these policies at the zero lower bound, the more cautious one would be in the process of removing accommodation. So, even though we are now slightly off the zero lower bound, an assessment of the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy has implications with respect to the current stance of monetary policy. Another important challenge for central banks is communication with the public. It is now accepted that the effectiveness of monetary policy is enhanced when the public has a clear understanding of the goals of monetary policy, and the framework and actions that the central bank will use to attain them. One important example is inflation expectations, which are important to the dynamics of inflation. Effective communication by the central bank can help to anchor inflation expectations at its target, thereby making it easier for the central bank to attain its inflation objective. The use of unconventional monetary policy has also heightened the focus on communication. In the past, communication almost exclusively focused on the likely short-term path for the central bank’s policy rate. But, once the zero lower bound became a constraint, forward guidance became an important communication tool to surmount the problems caused by that constraint. In addition, there are now many more dimensions to the stance of monetary policy, including the size and composition of the central bank’s balance sheet. When communicating about these various dimensions, it is important for the central bank to demonstrate its commitment to a framework rather than to a specific policy path, since the precise path of policy should be data dependent and the future is uncertain. Good communication can lead to a clear understanding of the Fed’s framework, which will help the public to assess the data along with the Fed and enable it to better predict how the Fed is likely to adjust policy as the economic outlook changes. As I indicated earlier, the challenges the FOMC faced in 1976 were very different from today’s. In addition, advances in information technology also have changed how we do our work. However, these advances come with the risk of increased exposure to cyber-attacks. The various motivations for these attacks include causing embarrassment to the central bank, stealing money, and disrupting critical financial services. The large sums of money potentially at risk mean that we need very strong defenses to lower the probability of success by cyber attackers in order to deter such efforts. Attacks can have consequences for a central bank’s reputation and the public’s confidence in it, underscoring the importance of a sturdy set of defenses and response actions. Protecting against cyber-attacks requires not only investment in the right infrastructure, policies and processes, but also vigilance from central bank employees. Many attacks involve tricking unsuspecting employees into installing malicious code or revealing key access information. Since this “phishing” plays on human weaknesses, to which we are all prone, protecting against these tactics requires ongoing training and testing, appropriate access controls, and segregation of duties in the context of critical infrastructures. Central banks also need reliable channels of communication and cooperation with those agencies that track and combat malicious cyber activity. The last topic that I would like to touch on is market liquidity and regulation. Market liquidity is essential to the proper functioning of financial markets. I think of it as the cost—both in expense and time—of buying or selling an asset for cash. Market liquidity is like engine oil, which is essential for engine parts to move properly without generating excessive friction and heat. Market liquidity reflects many factors, including the expense of conducting a transaction, the price of the transaction relative to the midpoint of the bid-ask spread, any impact of the transaction on the market price, and the speed at which the transaction can be completed. Some argue that market liquidity has been adversely affected by post-crisis regulation. For example, the higher capital and liquidity requirements for the largest securities dealers may have impaired market liquidity by reducing the profitability of dealer intermediation activities and raising the cost of dealer balance sheets. But, before considering whether any regulatory changes would be appropriate, it is important to carefully examine the evidence. New York Fed staff have been conducting an extensive analysis of empirical measures of market liquidity and the effects certain regulations may have had on it. The work to date finds little evidence—based on traditional liquidity measures—of any meaningful degradation in market liquidity across key asset classes. However, there are important data gaps that must be filled in order to have a more complete assessment. For example, the U.S. Treasury market data capture dealer-to-dealer transactions, but not dealer-to-customer transactions that are typically conducted on an over-the-counter basis. Moreover, we do see other consequences of regulation, such as the rise in the foreign exchange swap basis and the spread between LIBOR and the federal funds rate, as well as the decline in dealer repo financing activity. Still, it is important to keep in mind that even if further analysis were to identify a regulatory-related decline in market liquidity, any associated cost would have to be weighed against the benefits of these regulations in terms of a safer and more robust financial system. In closing, I hope you will find our program both engaging and challenging. Don’t be shy—our speakers welcome difficult and thought-provoking questions. Absorb all you can. Use this opportunity to network with your colleagues. Hopefully, this experience will stimulate your thinking and help you be successful in your career as a central banker. 1 Elizabeth Mahoney, Jonathan McCarthy, Nick Stanescu and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 For example, see Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly . Princeton University Press, 2009. 3 See Larry Summers' blog . 4 See Remarks at the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on the Household Debt and Credit Report . 5 See The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future . By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

New York City’s Return from the Brink - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech New York City’s Return from the Brink October 19, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Lotos Club, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here this evening at the Lotos Club, one of America’s oldest and most distinguished literary clubs. I am, of course, very happy to participate in tonight’s public affairs dinner and to accept the Lotos Award of Distinction. Tonight I would like to take a moment to discuss some of New York City’s recent history and its return from the economic brink. Aside from being a story of historical interest, I believe there are lessons embedded in New York City’s experience that are relevant to other cities and municipalities that find themselves struggling today. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Given the historical relevance of today’s date, it seems appropriate to start by recalling what happened on this day 29 years ago. In what has come to be known as “Black Monday,” the U.S. equity market suffered one of its steepest one-day drops in history, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average falling 508 points—a decline of more than 20 percent. This capped one of the worst weeks ever for the U.S. stock market. Many feared the worst for the U.S. economy—and especially for New York City. After all, the stock market crash in 1929 was followed by the Great Depression. As a young economist working on Wall Street, I certainly was worried—the situation didn’t seem consistent with future job stability. I went out that evening and bought myself a leather jacket. If I lost my job, I wanted to leave with something on my back, something tangible. As it turned out, although the city’s economy and Wall Street did indeed sustain a steep downturn, both were able to recover and to prosper. Not only was there no depression, the economy avoided falling into recession. And, importantly to me, I was able to keep both my job and my leather jacket. In retrospect, the 1987 crash was just a hiccup in what ultimately turned out to be a remarkable upturn in the city’s performance and prospects. However, to really understand this story of the city’s resilience, we need to take a look back at one of the darkest periods in New York City’s history: the 1970s. I remember New York City in the 1970s from my freshman days at Columbia University. Columbia was a great place to be a young student. There were engaging professors and I had the opportunity to read the great books of the university’s core contemporary civilization curriculum. Recognizing the strong literary traditions of the Lotos Club, I would also note that I had the fortune of reading some of the great works of Middle English, including Chaucer. I also enjoyed being on both the freshman wrestling and golf teams—even if it was an odd pairing and our teams were not very good. In contrast to Columbia, the city seemed much less attractive. From my perspective as a naïve 17-year-old from suburban Massachusetts, it seemed outright dangerous and dirty. The danger was driven home immediately. One of my roommates was robbed his first day during a walk through one of the nearby parks. He didn’t understand, nor did I at the time, that certain places near Columbia weren’t very safe, even during daylight hours. While you could avoid the crime by being careful where you went in the city, there was no avoiding the pollution. During this period, New York City still had considerable manufacturing activity, many apartment buildings burned low-grade oil and incinerated trash, and this was before the days of automobile catalytic converters. This confluence meant that grit was everywhere, and even for the non-fastidious—which I admit I was one—showers were an absolute necessity on a daily basis. Sometimes it was so bad that you couldn’t see across the Hudson River, which was just a few blocks away! In order to understand the situation the city faced in the 1970s, we have to look back a decade earlier. The 1960s were a time of hope and promise for New York City, with the World’s Fair, the opening of the Verrazano Bridge, and the beginning of construction of the World Trade Center. The city benefited from a booming stock market and strong overall job growth. My memories of New York City during that period were very glowing. Visiting from Massachusetts, I remember going to the World’s Fair and to a Mets game at the new Shea Stadium—heady stuff for an 11-year-old. As a boy who planned to be a nuclear physicist when he grew up, I particularly recall the General Electric exhibit at the World’s Fair that highlighted the potential of hydrogen fusion as a future power source. Although that turned out to be like flying cars—always somewhere just over the horizon—it was exciting to contemplate as an aspiring scientist. Unbeknownst to me,there were also some ominous signs for the city. The city’s manufacturing sector was losing jobs at a worrisome pace, population growth had slowed to a crawl, crime was on the rise and racial tensions were growing. As the sixties unfolded, there were also a number of major strikes affecting public services, most notably the 1968 teachers’ strike. Perhaps most importantly, the city’s finances were on a reckless path. Despite growth in the economy and the tax base, the city was taking on more short-term debt, relying increasingly on state aid and grossly underfunding its pensions. This is a familiar story where the seeds of future fiscal problems are sown during better economic times. In effect, a combination of a strong U.S. economy, a bull market on Wall Street and various forms of fiscal gimmickry masked the increasing underlying fiscal stresses that the city was experiencing. By 1970, when I arrived, some of this good fortune ended when the U.S economy was hit by recession and a bear market in equities began. What followed was a massive economic slump in New York City—what would generally be described as a depression. Some of the numbers are staggering: from 1970 to 1975, New York City saw a 6 percent decline in its population, a 15 percent drop in employment and a 50 percent surge in the murder rate. The combination of the need to roll over debt from the prior two decades, a shrinking tax base and increased costs of debt—which sometimes had been used to finance operating expenses—caused fiscal problems that forced the city to cut services and raise taxes. A continued bear market on Wall Street exacerbated the situation. In effect, New York City looked to be in a vicious cycle with companies shrinking, closing or moving out. The result was fewer jobs, an exodus of people, declining property values, rising crime rates and eroding tax revenues. This meant fewer firemen, police and teachers, which led, in turn, to more crime and poorer educational opportunities. Put simply, it was a horrible dynamic that looked difficult to reverse. At the end of 1975, New York City faced perhaps its darkest moment and greatest challenge of the modern era when it ran out of money to pay for basic services. The city’s persistent deficits caused the financial sector to lose confidence in the city’s ability to repay its debts, and the city lost its ability to borrow. Yet, this moment—when the outlook appeared bleakest—turned out to be an historic turning point for the city. The reforms that were subsequently imposed by the state and federal governments through the Emergency Financial Control Board were quite tough in many ways. There was plenty of pain to go around, and just about every stakeholder―including city officials, lenders, city workers and residents, to name just a few―shared in the sacrifice. The city’s extraordinarily large level of short-term debt was refinanced into long-term debt owed to the newly formed Municipal Assistance Corporation (MAC). To make this debt marketable to the public, MAC was given control over the city’s sales tax. Revenues from that tax were dedicated to repayment of the MAC debt, and the city could keep only what was left over. Fundamental to the deal was the creation of the Emergency Financial Control Board, which was empowered to monitor proposed city budgets to ensure that they were in balance. This change alone was very consequential: taxes increased and spending fell sharply over the latter half of the 1970s. By 1982, the city’s inflation-adjusted wage bill had fallen by almost 30 percent, and real investment in the city’s infrastructure fell by more than three-quarters and didn’t reach its 1974 levels until the early 1990s. The city gave up a significant amount of its autonomy in exchange for the relief it received. Ultimately, however, the reforms that were forced on the city created a responsible and transparent budgeting process that has served the city well to this day. By early 1976, the U.S. economy was recovering from a deep recession, and employment in New York City’s financial sector was once again on the rise. Overall employment in New York City began to recover by 1977, and unemployment began to decline. By the end of the decade, there were signs of hope, but it wasn’t at all clear yet whether the city was back on solid footing. While employment did rebound modestly, the city’s population was still declining, crime was still rising and the city was still having trouble borrowing. It would be 10 years after the initial crisis before the city was able to borrow again on its own in the public markets. By the mid-1980s, the resiliency of the city’s economy was becoming more apparent. City-wide employment barely declined during the wrenching recessions of the early 1980s—the first time in a long while that the city’s economy had out-performed the nation’s. In the next few years, job growth picked up sharply and real estate markets soared, a clear sign that a growing number of people had regained confidence in the city. But, even during the booming 1980s, crime rates continued to increase—it wasn’t until 1990 that crime rates peaked and began a long downward trend. I returned to New York in 1983. The draw was an employment opportunity in finance. At the time, the city’s circumstances were improving but crime was still high, and there were still lots of problems caused by years of underinvestment. For example, I recall that the New York City subway system at the time was a near-wreck, with train speeds sharply reduced in many areas due to poor track conditions and dilapidated infrastructure. But, the seeds of improvement were in place. The financial services industry was beginning a long boom marked by financial market innovation and the rapid development of the nation’s debt capital markets—a boom that ended with the financial crisis. When I arrived, the build-out of the Battery Park City neighborhood was just starting. My first year, I lived at Gateway Plaza, which was the first big apartment complex in Battery Park City. However, it was early days and the nearest grocery store was about half a mile away north on West Street! Although a major economic downturn throughout the Northeast in the early 1990s took its toll on New York City—especially on employment and home prices—the city’s population continued to grow and its crime rate began to decline. While the city has had a number of ups and downs since the early 1990s, in tandem with the United States, the general trend has been upwards. The city withstood a terror attack, financial crisis and natural disaster. Following the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001, there was uncertainty over whether this would be a permanent setback for the city. However, the city rebuilt and recovered and Lower Manhattan has evolved into a vibrant commercial, cultural and residential area. Gateway Plaza is still there, but the Battery Park City neighborhood today is now fully developed and well-established. There are even several grocery stores! The city weathered the recent financial crisis and the Great Recession far better than many would have anticipated. Although employment in the securities industry has stagnated after the decline due to the Great Recession, the city has found new sources of dynamism, including rapid growth in the technology sector and the further development of tourism. The number of technology workers in New York City has doubled to about 125,000 in the past decade. That sector is now is nearly as big as the securities industry. And New York City had 56 million visitors last year, nearly double the total of 25 years earlier. In 2011, an important milestone was reached: payroll employment surpassed its previous all-time peak, from 1969, and it has grown strongly since then. Crime rates have fallen significantly across the city since 1990, and real estate values have surged. One consistent source of strength for the city has been immigration. Over this period, New York City benefited from a sizable influx of immigrants, which more than offset out-migration in many neighborhoods. To illustrate this, let’s take a look at one such neighborhood in Brooklyn, Sunset Park, that was losing residents to the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s. As property values fell, new migrants from Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and Central America moved in. By 1990, Hispanics comprised about half of all Sunset Park residents. These new residents developed a thriving community, which boosted property values. There was also an influx of Chinese residents, and part of Sunset Park has come to be known as Brooklyn’s Chinatown. There are many other examples where immigrants revitalized whole neighborhoods: Russian and Ukrainian immigrants in Brighton Beach; Chinese and Korean immigrants in Flushing; and Indian immigrants in Jackson Heights, just to name a few. So, has it been all good news for New York City in recent years? Certainly not. Many challenges remain. One by-product of a strong economy and real estate market has been a decline in housing affordability, and an increase in homelessness. It is estimated that there are over 60,000 homeless people in New York City today—almost double the number from 10 years ago and more than four times as high as in the early 1980s. Moreover, poverty rates remain high in many parts of the city, and the education system can certainly be improved. Yet, a strong economy and a sound fiscal position at least provide the means to devote resources to help address these ongoing problems. This turnaround of New York City illustrates that reviving a city in trouble is indeed possible. There are some useful lessons from New York City’s experience. First, it is often darkest before the dawn. Cities in fiscal distress are like individuals suffering from addiction: they often have to hit bottom and reach out to others for help before they can begin to recover. New York City hit bottom in 1975, and that created the impetus for reform. Second, in such situations, cities often have to give up fiscal control for a time. Accepting a Control Board and operating under its mandates was a painful, but necessary, step toward rebuilding the city’s fiscal health and regaining access to financial markets. Third, when sound reforms are implemented it still takes a long time to achieve fruitful results, so it is important to stay the course. Fourth, although a strong economy, good fiscal position and transparency in government will not automatically solve every problem, they provide a strong foundation. So, what does the future hold for New York City? An important aspect of a city’s vitality is the ability of its residents to develop the skills necessary to be successful and to achieve their dreams. A big asset for the city is its access to affordable education. Each year, tens of thousands of low-to-moderate-income New Yorkers—many of them immigrants—send their children to one of the city’s specialized high schools. When it comes time for college, many of these same students have access to universities in the CUNY and SUNY systems. A recent highly regarded study assessed how much of an opportunity kids born to less advantaged families in different parts of the United States have of moving up in the world. New York City ranked 10th out of the 50 largest U.S. metro areas. 2 The Big Apple should strive to be number one in this ranking by continuing to improve access to quality and affordable education and to job training. We should all do our part to help make this happen. Also, it is important to remember that the measure of a city’s well-being is much broader than how many are employed and the level of economic activity. As Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, explained: In my own philanthropy and business endeavors, I have seen the critical role that the arts play in stimulating creativity and in developing vital communities…the arts have a crucial impact on our economy and are an important catalyst for learning, discovery, and achievement in our country. Through the fiscal crisis, into the 1980s and to the present day, the city maintained its status as a center of culture and the arts. The efforts of the city and the state, starting in the mid-1980s, to redevelop the Theatre District and Times Square area played an important role in revitalizing tourism. But, of course, the city’s well-deserved reputation for culture and arts goes well beyond Broadway—to the hundreds of Off-Broadway and neighborhood theaters, museums, music venues and organizations like yours. Supporting this cultural infrastructure is important to maintaining a vibrant economy and a bright future. The experience of New York City, which has gone from crisis to vibrancy, shows that the past need not be prologue for the future. It also shows that a well-managed regime of fiscal control can help begin the process for future recovery. Other cities and regions are at different points in this journey. Puerto Rico, for example, which has been in recession for many years and which defaulted on its debt obligations earlier this year, is at a particularly critical juncture. On the positive side, the fact that Congress has enacted legislation, the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management and Economic Stability Act, or PROMESA, does provide a way forward. The prospect for good fiscal stewardship has improved and this is an essential first step in the Island’s recovery. As I have noted elsewhere, there are significant opportunities for action that can leverage the Island’s strengths to foster economic growth. These include its bilingual adult population, an open economy occupying a central position in the Caribbean, wide experience as host to international corporations and close economic ties to the U.S. mainland. However, much as New York City took time to recover, so too will it take time for Puerto Rico to recover from its crisis of the last decade. The future of Puerto Rico is yet to be determined. However, the experience of New York City suggests that a turnaround is possible even when underlying conditions appear dire. New York City is a compelling example of what is possible when you leverage your citizens’ ingenuity and capacity for reinvention. It shows what can be achieved with the appropriate discipline and effort. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Jason Bram, Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 4, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue October 20, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and to our third conference focused on culture within the financial services industry. It is encouraging to see all of you in attendance today—in particular, the many non-executive directors, representatives from the investor community, and foreign supervisors who have joined us to help broaden and deepen the dialogue. Thank you for your participation. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The evidence is pervasive that deep-seated cultural and ethical problems have plagued the financial services industry in recent years. Bad conduct has occurred in both investment banking and securities market activities as well as in retail banking. 2 This has eroded the industry's trustworthiness. This erosion impedes the ability of the financial services industry to do its job. That job is financial intermediation—to facilitate the efficient transfer of resources from savers to borrowers, and to help customers manage the financial risks they face. Verification—whether through regulation or internal controls—is an expensive substitute for trustworthiness. Fines for bad behavior drain resources that could be better used to expand access and improve services, but billions of dollars in avoidable penalties are just the start. The time spent handling a legal crisis is time not spent on more productive pursuits. Moreover, I worry that, in the long term, an industry that develops a reputation for dubious ethics will not attract the best talent. 3 In contrast, a trustworthy financial services sector will be more productive and better able to support the economy. Reliable financial intermediaries can help increase the flow of credit, promote economic growth and make the financial system more stable. This is why restoring trustworthiness must be the ultimate goal of reforming culture. The industry's shared norms—its culture—will not change by mere exhortation to the good, whether from me or from the industry's CEOs. In my experience, people respond far more to incentives and clear accountability than to statements of virtues and values. The latter are worthy and necessary, but remain aspirational or even illusory unless they are tied to real consequences. 4 What does it mean for a firm to profess to putting the customer first, if employees are compensated and promoted regardless of what's good for customers? Or, worse, if they are not held to account for activities that can harm customers? If we focus on nothing else in today's conference, let's explore how best to structure incentives and reinforce accountability to align with core purposes and first principles. To put it very simply, incentives drive behavior, and behavior establishes the social norms that drive culture. If the incentives are wrong and accountability is weak, we will get bad behavior and cultures. This implies a role for both firms and supervisors. Firms need to continually assess their incentive regimes so that they are consistent with good conduct and culture. When they are not consistent, the incentives need to be changed. Supervisors should also play a role in assessing firms' incentive structures. For example, they should evaluate: How is compensation determined? In particular, is questionable conduct―such as compliance violations―consistently reflected in decisions about compensation and promotion? Do risk managers have the appropriate authority to challenge frontline revenue producers and prevent activity that is questionable? When that occurs, are there appropriate negative consequences for the frontline revenue producers? When people speak up to point out potential conduct issues, how are they treated? Are they held up as examples to emulate, or are they discouraged or even penalized? The answers to these questions should indicate whether incentives must be changed in order to foster the appropriate behaviors and culture. The primary responsibility for reforming culture—and changing incentives—belongs to the industry. However, the industry does not act alone. The public sector can play an important role as well. I'll discuss that issue this morning with my colleagues Norman Chan, chief executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, and Minouche Shafik, deputy governor of the Bank of England. Later this morning another panel will discuss the ways in which supervision can further contribute to improving bank culture. Let's also consider ways in which new laws or regulations might help—especially to overcome perennial collective action and first-mover problems that are common across the industry. Two years ago I proposed solutions to two such obstacles to reforming culture. First, there should be a database of banker misconduct to combat the problem of "rolling bad apples." 5 Second, a baseline assessment of culture is needed in order to measure progress. I proposed an industry-wide survey, but there may be other good alternatives. Once again, I invite the industry to take the initiative on these issues, and to look to the public sector for support. I also hope that we will attend to issues that we may have overlooked in our earlier discussions. Gillian Tett of the Financial Times argues in her new book, The Silo Effect , that the key to understanding any culture is identifying and explaining "social silences"—the issues that are not being discussed. 6 Where do we encounter those issues in reforming the culture of financial services? One place might be the role of investors in firms. Are their expectations of returns reasonable and consistent with a trustworthy financial services industry? Another place might be the boardroom. Boards should establish and promote a culture based on ethics and respect for law. Have boards risen to this challenge? If not, what's needed? And, going forward, are we thinking hard about how technological change will influence incentives, behavior and culture? We'll hear these issues discussed in several panels today. These issues require thoughtful reflection by the industry. The need for reflection, though, is not limited to boards, or even to banks. Regulators and bankers alike can benefit from such a habit. In that vein, I want to share with you an everyday checklist proposed by Ignazio Angeloni of the European Central Bank. 7 He has posed six questions that seek to make responsibility for culture both individual and routine: Are you doing what you promised to do? Are you using your best knowledge and intention in doing it? Are you doing what public authorities, superiors, colleagues and business partners expect you to do, and if not why? Are you conforming to the mission and the values of your company, as they are publicly stated? Will your actions enhance public confidence in your company and in the financial sector? Finally, and crucially, would you behave similarly if your actions were publicly observed? I suspect that while seemingly simple, the discipline of asking ourselves these questions on a regular basis and answering them thoughtfully and honestly may be more challenging, thought provoking and effective than one might initially think. I thank the staff at the New York Fed who put together today's program, and their colleagues who are in the audience and watching today. The diverse professional training and experience of our staff are among the New York Fed's strengths. Bank supervisors, risk managers, economists, traders and lawyers contribute insights from their respective professions that lead to better outcomes. In the spirit of learning from other disciplines, I am delighted to introduce today's keynote speaker. Some of you may recall that, two years ago, Sir David Walker opened our first culture conference with the words, "I am grateful to the philosopher Onora O'Neill for reference to very relevant advice." 8 Today we have gone to the source. Baroness O'Neill is professor emeritus of philosophy at the University of Cambridge, former president of the British Academy, and former chair of the United Kingdom's Equality and Human Rights Commission. She was appointed a life peer and member of the House of Lords in 1999, and, in 2007, was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society. Today, Baroness O'Neill serves as a member of the Banking Standards Board. Her 2002 lectures on trustworthiness—reprinted in the book A Question of Trust —have been tremendously influential among New York Fed staff working on culture. Baroness O'Neill, the floor is yours. 1 Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Jacqueline McCormack, Thomas Noone and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail , Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, November 7, 2013. 3 Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., The Rewards of an Ethical Culture , Remarks at the Bank of England, January 20, 2015. 4 Daniel Awrey and David Kershaw, "Toward a More Ethical Culture in Finance: Regulatory and Governance Strategies," in Nicholas Morris and David Vines, eds., Capital Failure: Rebuilding Trust in Financial Services , 284 (2014) ("While codes of conduct, ethics, and best practice can be drafted and held up as identifying desirable behaviors, the norms these codes purport to reflect may be overpowered by other countervailing influences."). 5 Mark Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, "The Market for Financial Advisor Misconduct," Working Paper 22050, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2016. 6 Gillian Tett, The Silo Effect , 45 (2016). 7 Ignazio Angeloni, Ethics in finance: a banking supervisory perspective , Remarks at the Conference on "The New Financial Regulatory System: Challenges and Consequences for the Financial Sector," September 26, 2014. 8 David Walker, Trust and Trustworthiness in Banks and Bankers , Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 20, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Second Annual Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Second Annual Conference October 24, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Second Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery On behalf of the New York Fed and our co-sponsors, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this second annual conference on the evolving structure of the U.S. Treasury market. We have the opportunity today to continue the dialogue around the changing nature of the Treasury market, a discussion that grew more urgent following the events of October 15, 2014. 1 We have made significant progress since last year’s conference in improving our collective understanding of the Treasury market, and I believe it is important to continue official and private sector collaboration on this topic. Indeed, there is much left to do to ensure the continued integrity and effectiveness of this market, and I look forward to the further progress we will make today. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 2 Over the past year, the Joint Member Agencies 3 have engaged with market participants and other members of the public to gain more information on the changing structure of the Treasury market. The Treasury’s Request for Information, and comments on various SEC and CFTC proposals, have provided thoughtful perspectives on the evolution of Treasury market structure. We have also benefited from consultation with groups such as the Treasury Markets Practices Group (TMPG), which is made up of market professionals committed to supporting the integrity and efficiency of the Treasury market. Continued engagement between the official sector and the public on the Treasury market remains necessary to help to manage its evolution, and to best maintain its efficient function and integrity. Those of you who transact in this market have a crucial perspective on how the Treasury market works and what information is useful for evaluating its function. Engagement between the official and private sectors can also facilitate the development of timely solutions to important issues in the industry. Such efforts include the best practices the TMPG has produced for the Treasury, agency debt and agency MBS markets, 4 and the Group of 30’s recommendations on banking culture and conduct 5 ―an issue I believe the financial industry must continue to work on. 6 In fact, it is this type of collaboration―between a wide array of market participants and official agencies―that helps different perspectives come together to create effective practices. 7 In addition to engagement with the public, the Joint Member Agencies have continued their inter-agency collaboration. We have been working together to share information and help shape the most effective path forward for public policy. These actions include the signing of a memorandum of understanding that further facilitates information sharing related to the Treasury market, and again co-hosting this conference. Going forward, the staff of the Joint Member Agencies will continue to work together on effective and comprehensive data collection, monitoring of market activity and liquidity through the Interagency Working Group, development of principles and best practices for Treasury market data transparency, and the regulatory framework for government securities. A main focus of recent work by the Joint Member Agencies has been to improve the availability of information to both the official sector and the public. Given this emphasis, it is worth spending a few moments discussing the benefits of obtaining timely and robust data on Treasury market transactions. Data are essential to understanding flash events and market liquidity. Attendees at this conference are very familiar with the events of October 15, 2014, when the 10-year Treasury yield experienced a 37-basis-point trading range over the session. At that time, market participants struggled to identify what had caused that sharp movement. Similarly, a flash event occurred in the British pound just this month. The pound depreciated nearly 6 percent, and then largely retraced this move within several minutes, seemingly without a major catalyst. Once the domain of equity markets, flash events have happened with increasing frequency, also occurring in the dollar-yen and euro-dollar currency pairs in recent years. Treasury and foreign exchange markets share a number of common attributes. They are evolving rapidly, they are highly automated in key market segments, and information on trading activity is not widely available. As a result, it is challenging for the official sector, market participants, and members of the public to effectively analyze these markets, understand the sources and risks of flash events, and evaluate how liquidity is changing. Given the role of the Treasury market as the deepest and most liquid fixed income market in the world, it is clear that both the official sector and the public need improved access to transaction-level data, and I am pleased that we are making real progress on this front. Greater transparency into Treasury market activity is necessary in maintaining the market’s many important roles: as a risk-free benchmark for financial instruments; as a liquid investment and source of safe collateral; as a channel for the implementation of monetary policy; and, of course, as a tool to help finance U.S. government activities. As the Treasury market continues to evolve, several complex questions lie ahead. How should data reporting gaps be closed to ensure that as many relevant Treasury transactions as possible are collected? What is the proper scope and best process for sharing Treasury market data with the public? How can the Joint Member Agencies and private stakeholders best collaborate to ensure Treasury market stability and efficient market function, even as market structure evolves and new technologies emerge? What considerations need to be made regarding Treasury market clearance practices given the growth in activity by participants who are not central counterparty members? Will the evolving settlement marketplace introduce new challenges to Treasury market participants? How must practices and culture evolve as market structure does? And, how will the interplay of all of these issues affect the future of the Treasury market? Today’s conference provides an excellent opportunity to discuss these issues. Thank you for coming. I look forward to today’s dialogue and the ongoing engagement between the Joint Member Agencies and the public as we all strive to ensure the continued sound functioning of this essential marketplace. 1 Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 , U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, July 13, 2015. 2 Ellen Correia Golay, Frank Keane and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 3 The Joint Member Agencies are the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 4 Best Practices for Treasury, Agency Debt, and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities Markets , Treasury Markets Practices Group, Revised February 2016. 5 Banking Conduct and Culture , Group of 30, July 2015. 6 Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , William C. Dudley, October 20, 2016. 7 The Role of Best Practices in Supporting Market Integrity and Effectiveness , Simon Potter, Remarks at the 2016 Primary Dealers Meeting, September 7, 2016. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Evolution of Work Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Evolution of Work Conference November 17, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Evolution of Work Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning. I would like to welcome you to this conference on the Evolution of Work. Today, we will explore how the nature of work is evolving, including the role of technology, shifts in employee work arrangements and employer-employee relationships, and the effects of these changes on workforce development strategies. We are pleased to host this conference with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Freelancers Union. We welcome all the leaders from across academia, government, industry, labor and the nonprofit sector assembled here to explore the transformation of the workforce, and the impact this has had on communities and the economy more broadly. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 As you know, the Federal Reserve monitors the labor market closely, given that maximum sustainable employment is one goal of the Fed’s dual mandate. The evolving nature of the workplace—and the speed with which it is changing—are therefore important developments that we must continue to monitor. Traditional nine-to-five jobs are becoming less common, and people are increasingly employed in less traditional work arrangements. Measuring the creation and destruction of these new jobs is of utmost importance to gain a better assessment of the health of the labor market. We also need to understand how this evolution is affecting job security and earnings stability. While these jobs might provide workers with more flexibility, they might also come with increased income volatility and financial vulnerability. In today’s gathering, we will discuss the measurement challenges we face to better understand this growing segment of the labor market, and we will facilitate a dialogue aimed at developing a workforce aligned with the evolving nature of work. The Fed’s efforts to understand labor markets include analyzing the comprehensive data that exist now. But, in an ever-changing workplace, it is critical that we hear from external stakeholders to understand their views on these changes and to ensure we incorporate them in our assessments. This is an important part of our discussion. As technological changes persist, it is inevitable that the nature of our jobs will continue to evolve. We may not readily recall the days when there was little job flexibility and we did not have today’s technology to assist us in our work. While technological transformation allows for further growth in productivity and innovation, we must also think through how these changes affect the workforce overall. We must realign our workforce development strategies with these changes. Today, we will also focus on what this evolution means for low- and moderate-income households. One session will explore on-the-ground community development and labor models, with a focus on the implications for low- and moderate-income earners. This will be an important discussion on how to help workers build the skills necessary to adapt to change—a conversation that should ultimately include workers, their employers, their communities and the public sector, working together. We all need to share in the responsibility of helping people increase and maintain the skills relevant to contributing valued work. Again, I wish you a fruitful dialogue, and I commend you for coming together to discuss such important issues and the trends affecting the U.S. workforce. 1 Nora Fitzpatrick, Laura Pilossoph, Anika Pratt and Aysegul Sahin assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Survey of Consumer Expectations - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Survey of Consumer Expectations November 18, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Survey of Consumer Expectations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing . I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak with you today about our Survey of Consumer Expectations . This is an important source of information that we use in our analysis of current and future economic conditions to help inform our monetary policy decisions. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 In pursuing its monetary policy objectives, the Federal Reserve relies on a large number of data sources that provide information about recent developments and the current state of the economy. Most of these data sources are backward looking. That is, they provide data about past decisions and outcomes. In contrast, we know relatively little about the forward-looking subjective expectations and intentions of economic agents, which are a key determinant of current and future outcomes. This information, though, is essential for formulating policy and evaluating its effectiveness. The macroeconomic outcomes we observe reflect preferences and constraints, as well as beliefs of individual consumers and firms. Therefore, a fuller understanding of such outcomes requires reliable data on the beliefs and intentions held by economic agents and how they evolve over time. In particular, consumer expectations influence a variety of considerations, including spending and saving behavior, wage dynamics, job search, housing demand and the demand for credit. Given their importance in determining U.S. economic activity, consumer expectations are of particular value in assessing the economic outlook and the related risks. Over the last decade, we have devoted significant resources to improving the measurement of the economic expectations of households. This work culminated in the creation of the Survey of Consumer Expectations, or SCE, in 2013. The expectations data collected in our survey give us direct insight into households’ decision-making and consumers’ financial and economic outlooks. While we monitor expectations on a number of topics, of particular importance are households’ medium-term inflation expectations. Having reliable measures of inflation expectations is crucial to assess the effectiveness of monetary policy and central bank communications. Such an assessment focuses on analyzing the extent to which longer-run inflation expectations remain well-anchored, and on learning more about how agents update and revise their expectations in response to new information. The SCE allows us to carry out this sort of analysis. Besides their obvious policy relevance, the SCE data are also highly valuable for research. Our economists have shown that the SCE’s expectations data are informative and predictive of respondents’ current and future behavior. They have also documented the substantial heterogeneity in the formation and updating of expectations across demographic groups. To facilitate further research, we make the survey data available in the Center for Microeconomic Data section of our website. Each month we also illustrate the trends in our expectations series through easy-to-use, interactive charts. Further, a number of our Liberty Street Economics blog posts describe the data and the analysis we have conducted. We do this because we want researchers, policymakers, commentators and the general public to understand the data and to follow our updates. Let me now describe our Survey of Consumer Expectations in more detail. The Survey of Consumer Expectations Following extensive design and testing, we launched the Survey of Consumer Expectations in June 2013. The survey has a number of innovative and unique features, three of which I would like to highlight today. First and foremost, as I mentioned earlier, it collects households’ subjective expectations and intentions on a wide range of economic outcomes and behaviors. In addition to short- and medium-term inflation expectations, it collects data on households’ expectations regarding the housing, labor and credit markets, as well as households’ financial situations and a host of other macroeconomic variables of interest. For example, the survey elicits beliefs about future wage growth, house price appreciation, job search and labor market transitions, households’ spending and income growth, and credit applications. By collecting data on a broad range of expectations, it is possible to analyze how they interact with each other and jointly influence households’ decisions. We also study how expectations vary with demographics and other household characteristics. The broad scope of the SCE allows us to study many questions relevant to economic policy—such as understanding housing market decisions, disentangling credit demand from supply, analyzing job search behavior and measuring wage growth as people transition between jobs. In addition, the survey has been used to help answer other policy-relevant questions as they have come up in our discussions. Two examples are households’ spending response to the decrease in gas prices in early 2014, and households’ early experiences and perceptions of the Affordable Care Act following its enactment. Some of this analysis relies on the ability of our survey to shed light on whether consumers expect a specific change in economic conditions to be temporary or permanent. A second important feature of the survey is that—in addition to simple point forecasts—for some variables, such as inflation, we get respondents’ entire forecast distributions by asking them to assign probabilities to various ranges of future outcomes. These so-called density forecasts in turn allow us to measure households’ uncertainty about future events by looking at the spread in their subjective distributions. Density forecasts also allow us to monitor the perceived likelihood that respondents assign to specific events, such as deflation or a large increase in earnings. A third important characteristic of the SCE is that it is a rotating panel. Each month about 1,300 household heads participate in our survey. This is a nationally representative sample. Respondents remain on the panel for up to 12 months, with a constant fraction entering and rotating out each month. This allows us to monitor the expectations of the same respondents over time, which provides important benefits. First, it gives us greater confidence that month-to-month changes in our headline numbers reflect true changes in beliefs, and not just changes in the sample composition. Second, observing repeated responses by the same individuals allows us to examine how expectations are formed and revised over time. Third, by following the same people over time, we are able to study how expectations are related to contemporaneous and future economic decisions and outcomes for these respondents. Today the SCE team will provide further background about the survey, discuss newly released findings for October and recent trends in some of its main indicators. The team will then present findings from two special components of the SCE: one that covers households’ credit experiences and expectations, and one that deals with labor market behavior and expectations. Before I pass this on to my colleagues, I would like to comment briefly on these two special surveys. New findings on Credit Access The SCE Credit Access Survey supplements the information collected in the Federal Reserve Board’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, also known as SLOOS. The SLOOS is a primary source of information on credit standards and credit demand as perceived and reported by banks . In contrast, the SCE Credit Access Survey, which has been conducted at a four-month frequency since October 2013, measures experiences in credit markets as perceived by households . The combination of the two data sources provides a more complete picture of household credit access and demand. Today, we are releasing the October 2016 findings as well as introducing new data from the survey. A unique feature of the SCE is its measure of latent credit demand—that is, demand that does not lead to an application for credit. We measure this latent credit demand as the proportion of households who report that, while needing credit, they did not apply because they expected their application to be rejected. In addition to current credit experiences, we also elicit households’ expectations of their future credit applications and the likelihood of these applications being approved. As we will show later, the survey provides useful insights into the extent and variation in met and unmet credit needs across households. Moreover, our analysis indicates that reported expectations are indeed predictive of credit outcomes reported four months later. New Findings on Job Search While the SCE Credit Access Survey allows us to track credit market experiences and expectations, the SCE Labor Market Survey gathers information on the job search behavior and expectations of employed and unemployed respondents. Aggregate labor market statistics on earnings, employment and labor market transitions are readily available, yet relatively little is known about the expectations and search behaviors of labor market participants and how these change over time. Our SCE Labor Market Survey collects rich information on respondents’ actual and expected wage offers, as well as their reservation wage, which is the lowest wage or salary they say they would accept for a new job. We also elicit expectations about future labor market transitions, such as the likelihood of staying with the same employer, switching employers, finding a job or being laid off. Over time, changes in responses to these questions can shed light on how workers’ expectations evolve, and how these changes relate to observed trends in aggregate earnings and employment dynamics. Our preliminary analyses of the data suggest that these expectations measures are predictive of respondents’ subsequent labor market outcomes. In coming years, as we generate a longer time series for the survey, we will be able to explore whether the expectations we collect can be used to construct leading indicators of the job market. Now, I'd like to turn things over to our economists, beginning with Olivier Armantier, who will provide further background and specifics about our survey. 1 Olivier Armantier, Giorgio Topa, Joseph Tracy, Wilbert van der Klaauw and Basit Zafar assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 29, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Puerto Rico Convention Center, San Juan, Puerto Rico As prepared for delivery I am very pleased to be here and to have this opportunity to speak with representatives of Puerto Rico’s business and academic communities. In my remarks, I will discuss the lessons learned from municipalities in the United States that have faced crises over the years―such as New York City―and what those outcomes might imply for Puerto Rico as it seeks to restore and sustain economic growth. I will also touch briefly on the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey , a new survey from the New York Fed that focuses on the business performance, financing needs and borrowing experiences of firms across the Island. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 My meeting with you today is part of the New York Fed’s continuing efforts to understand what is going on at the grassroots level within our Federal Reserve district. We plan these trips so we can interact with a diverse group of stakeholders. These meetings help me get a more complete picture of economic conditions on the Island and a fuller understanding of the major issues and concerns. This is the third time we have visited Puerto Rico in the past five years. Yesterday, I met with Governor-elect Rosselló to discuss the transition into his new role and the key challenges for his upcoming term. I also spent time with members of El Colaboratorio, a shared workspace organized by the Foundation for Puerto Rico. I attended a roundtable discussion with local businesses and spoke with former and current members of several of the New York Fed’s advisory councils. Earlier this morning, I met with the heads of a number of financial institutions and the University of Puerto Rico’s interim president, Celeste Freytes. Following this visit, I will meet with the leadership from Parallel18, an economic development initiative that attracts early-stage, high-potential startups to Puerto Rico. Finally, I will join the leadership of the Boys and Girls Clubs of Puerto Rico for a discussion on the organization’s initiatives and a site visit to one of the clubs to learn about workforce development programs and youth services. As we all know, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has been through a very rough 10 years. The economy has been in a long slump that could easily be called a depression. Residents have endured a terrible drought, periodic blackouts and a fiscal crisis. I don’t need to elaborate on all of the struggles Puerto Rico continues to face. The Island has been suffering from a vicious cycle. As employment declines, people move to the mainland to find jobs. Accordingly, economic activity and tax revenues decline, forcing the government to raise taxes and cut spending, which further reduces employment and prompts still more residents to move. At this point, the outlook for anyone who has been living here must be bleak, and it may be hard to imagine this situation turning around anytime soon. And yet, history tells us that a turnaround, though not inevitable, is indeed achievable. Lessons from Past Crises New York City is probably the most famous example of a municipality that experienced a major fiscal crisis, recovered and is now thriving. New York City’s experience is viewed, in retrospect, as a major success, and some, including myself, have pointed to it as a hopeful example of what could come to pass in Puerto Rico. But, there are important caveats to the New York City story and its applicability to the Commonwealth. Like Puerto Rico, New York City experienced a number of years of both political and economic pain as a result of its fiscal crisis in the 1970s. On the political side, New York City residents lost a large measure of their ability to chart their own fiscal direction for several years. Decisions about tax and spending policies were removed from elected city officials. The Emergency Financial Control Board was empowered to review all fiscal decisions of local officials and demand changes to the city’s budgets. Part of the city’s tax base was dedicated to bond repayment—essentially handing it over to the city’s creditors. For 10 years, the city could not access the debt markets without support from the state. The economic pain was also very real. More than 70,000 city government workers were cut from the payrolls in 1975 and 1976. City residents faced dramatic service reductions—fire houses closed, schools and police precincts had fewer resources, and crime continued to rise for many years. It is also important to note that New York isn’t the only U.S. city that has been through a major fiscal crisis. Cleveland, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C. and, most recently, Detroit have all struggled to manage their budgets, and all ultimately reached a point when they were unable to pay their bills. As a result, these cities lost their fiscal autonomy to one degree or another. In the case of New York City, this turned out relatively well, as the short-run loss of decision-making power led to a strong economic rebound that eventually restored the city’s ability to finance its own choices. So, is New York City’s experience really all that instructive for Puerto Rico? With the advantage of hindsight, it now seems almost obvious that New York City’s fiscal crisis was only going to be a detour. The city’s economy had many fundamental strengths, so it only needed some assistance to get back on track. Still, it’s worth pointing out that this was by no means clear at the outset the crisis in the mid-1970s. Then, many commentators looked at New York City and other large cities as outmoded forms of economic activity, unlikely ever to recover. While we do not have great measures of economic activity for cities, population change is a good indicator of how attractive a place seems to be. By that measure, New York City at the time was seen to have very poor prospects—the city’s population fell by over 10 percent during the 1970s. So, New York City’s eventual bright future was far from clear as its fiscal crisis was unfolding. Of course, not every city that has faced a fiscal crisis has the same track record. Relative to cities that had similarly grim outlooks, New York City’s rebound has been much stronger. In Detroit, there are hopeful signs, but it’s too soon to tell how things will turn out. Both Washington, D.C. and Philadelphia experienced multiple decades of population declines leading up to their crises. These population declines reversed in the 2000s. Washington, D.C.’s population actually grew over 5 percent between 2000 and 2010, a rate even faster than that of New York City. Cleveland’s fiscal reforms, on the other hand, were less comprehensive, and the city has never really turned itself around. Its population in 2010 was less than half the level of 1960. The different performances across cities reflect the complex interplay of native endowments, economic conditions and fiscal outcomes. As in Puerto Rico, the fiscal woes of many of our largest cities have been closely related to long-term economic transformations—essentially, changes in the industrial specialization that occurred in those particular places. In the case of New York City, the transformation was from manufacturing to services, and it took a generation to complete. The city’s management of that transition was far from perfect, and the fiscal crisis was the major manifestation of that failure. The institutions set up to respond to the crisis were crucial to ensuring that fiscal policy didn’t continue to amplify the problems associated with the economic transition. For a city to turn its circumstances around, it must navigate this economic transformation, identify what will define its comparative advantages going forward, and then build anew around those sources of strength. The Road to Recovery A successful fiscal reform first requires a regime in which local officials recognize and accept the reality of the changing economic situation, and set spending budgets accordingly. This part is fairly straightforward, because it produces the simple policy dictum that borrowing—in all its forms—must be strictly limited. Of course, knowing what to do and actually getting it done are different things, especially when politics are involved. As a result, the record suggests that it can be extremely helpful to have some kind of independent fiscal monitor in place on an ongoing basis. It’s important that this monitor be insulated from the direct influence of politics, giving it freedom to deliver objective analysis that may at times be very unpopular. In Washington, D.C., this took the form of the Office of the Chief Financial Officer; in New York City it is the Independent Budget Office, which is modeled after the Congressional Budget Office. These monitors have proven invaluable in keeping policymakers and the public informed on budgetary matters, and in providing apolitical expertise to assist in keeping budgets on a sustainable course. The second major component is a successful completion of the economic transformation, which is a critical factor for reversing―rather than simply halting―a city’s decline, establishing a virtuous cycle of rising growth and strengthening fiscal outcomes. New York City had the huge benefit of its comparative advantage in finance—an industry that was poised for sustained growth in the post-fiscal-crisis period of the 1980s through the 2000s. Still, the city weathered a lot of shocks during that period, including the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the financial crisis and Hurricane Sandy. It’s also worth pointing out that New York City is still prospering, even though employment in its finance sector has stagnated. This illustrates the need for cities to continually look for new areas of growth, such as health care, technology, and leisure and hospitality services. This is why PROMESA (the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act) emphasizes long-term growth, and why the New York Fed has been focused on identifying impediments to the Commonwealth’s growth. Since 2012, we have released two major reports and several shorter analyses—most of which appeared in our Liberty Street Economics blog—presenting ideas that, if implemented, might help to make the Island more competitive and reverse its economic decline. These ideas have ranged from the very narrow and technical to the very broad—from improving the quality of Commonwealth financial reporting to bolstering growth through education and job training to build the Island’s human capital. Since I’ve identified managing the ongoing economic transformation as a major component of a successful plan for Puerto Rico, let me summarize a few themes on that front. Most of these feature an important role for the Commonwealth’s government, underscoring the fundamental importance of getting public policy right as a means of restoring economic growth. First, it is important to reduce the cost of doing business on the Island as a way of encouraging business growth and increasing the demand for labor. We have put forward many ideas to consider here, ranging from ones targeted at hiring—such as giving Puerto Rico more autonomy over setting its minimum wage policy—to more general ideas like streamlining regulation. One thing that we’ve repeatedly emphasized is the need to find efficiencies in the Island’s energy industry. Commercial customers on the Island pay roughly 20 cents per kilowatt hour for electricity—nearly double the mainland average. Island residents and businesses, as you are well aware, are also burdened with exceptionally high water utility bills. It is also important to think hard about the supply of labor—the willingness of people to work, and the education and skills that they have to bring to the market. Labor supply is equally important, but less widely discussed than the demand side of the market. Labor force participation is lower at all ages in Puerto Rico than on the mainland. This is a crucial impediment to growth, and addressing it requires innovative policy options. One idea to address this problem would be to extend the Earned Income Tax Credit to Puerto Rico. In addition, the structure of the Commonwealth’s tax system creates disincentives to work in the formal sector, and suggests that tax reform could produce a growth dividend as well as a more reliable source of revenue. On top of the low labor force participation is the well known and deeply concerning high level of out-migration. In addition to the lack of labor demand, it seems likely that quality-of-life concerns such as high crime rates are playing a role in these decisions. This underscores the importance of basic public service delivery and is another example of the interplay between fiscal and economic outcomes. Another important dimension of labor supply involves the skills that workers bring to the market. Many of these skills are acquired while in school. Our research indicates that test scores for school-age children on the Island are low, suggesting that there is an opportunity for improvement in the quality of public education. One clear lesson from recent research in urban and regional economics is that the collective skills of the people living in an area are a critical ingredient for its growth prospects. Improving the education available to residents can pay large dividends over time. I know that this list seems long, and none of issues I have raised are easy to address. Nonetheless, I am confident that Puerto Rico has started on the road to recovery. In the current environment, it’s hard to see beyond the immediate crisis to a brighter future for Puerto Rico, but that has been said of other places that have come back stronger than ever. Getting the fiscal situation in order is an important first step. The factors leading up to the crisis took many years to develop, and history shows that a successful recovery from a crisis also takes time. It is important to recognize that fact and to stay the course. Before I conclude, let me briefly discuss our new survey. Earlier this month, the New York Fed released the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey , which focuses on the business performance, financing needs and borrowing experiences of firms across the Island. The survey is intended to fill important knowledge gaps and flag potential economic growth opportunities for the Commonwealth. It was designed with input from partners here in Puerto Rico, and we are very grateful for their cooperation. Key findings reveal that firms are persevering through Puerto Rico's economic crisis, though a majority reported declining revenues. Managing cash flow is a top concern, ranking above concerns about rising business costs. There is significant demand for credit, with the most common reason being the need to meet operating expenses. For about half of all small firms, credit needs were under $25,000. Lastly, about 80 percent of firms do not sell online or export their wares or services. Firms see this as a growth opportunity, ranking programs in support of increasing sales—to the federal government, via online commerce and through exports—as their top training need. We hope that the survey will provide useful insights into a key economic sector and help inform policy to support Puerto Rico’s recovery. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Jason Bram, Tony Davis, Andrew Haughwout and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
