Perspectives on the Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy in the Coming Year Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The 50 Club Cleveland, OH February 4, 2019 1 Introduction I thank Barbara Snyder and The 50 Club for inviting me to speak tonight about the economy and monetary policy. I am especially looking forward to the question and answer portion of the program because as we navigate through the year, we will need to be particularly attuned to what is happening on the ground. The Federal Reserve System is actually well structured to do that. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, right up the street, is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks distributed across the country that, along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise the Federal Reserve System. Congress designed the Fed more than 100 years ago as a decentralized central bank, independent within the government but not independent from the government. The Fed was designed to balance public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. This design has served the country well by allowing monetary policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. The regional structure also allows us to carry out our other responsibilities, including supervising and regulating banks, offering financial services to the U.S. government, overseeing the payments system, and identifying policies that can help promote economic progress and access to credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The Cleveland Fed is proud to be part of the civic landscape in Cleveland and the rest of our District, which includes the state of Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia. Many of you provide us with your insights into business activity, labor markets, and financial conditions, collected through our surveys and advisory councils, and I thank you for that public service. This timely information is very helpful to me as I formulate my economic outlook and monetary policy views, which I’ll speak about tonight. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed. 2 The National Economic Outlook Rather than “bury the lede,” let me start with last week’s FOMC decision. The FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate, our policy rate, at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, and we have adopted a wait-and-see approach regarding future rate adjustments. I fully supported this decision because I believe that policy, for the time being, is well-calibrated to the economic outlook and the risks around that outlook. Economic growth Congress has given the Fed its monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, and from the standpoint of those goals, the U.S. economy has been doing very well. We have enjoyed above- trend output growth for the past couple of years, with estimates suggesting that growth was around 3 percent last year. After several years of being below-target, inflation has moved up and has been relatively stable around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective, and labor markets are very strong, with above- trend job growth and very low unemployment. The question is whether the economy can maintain its good performance in 2019. My expectation is that it will. In my view, the most likely case is that we will see somewhat slower growth than we did last year, in the 2 to 2-1/2 percent range, reflecting less of a boost from fiscal stimulus and less accommodative financial conditions. But this pace is still at or slightly above trend. Employment growth will also slow a bit, but it will remain strong enough to absorb those entering the workforce, and I expect the unemployment rate to remain at or below 4 percent. As this transition toward a sustainable pace occurs, I expect inflation to remain near 2 percent, with the usual transitory ups and downs. If this outlook comes to pass, we will chalk up 2019 as another very good year for the economy. But the path to sustainability is rarely smooth, and uncertainty is clouding the outlook. The partial shutdown of the federal government is a case in point. It caused significant hardships for the workers who weren’t 3 getting paid and for businesses that rely on the parts of the government that weren’t operating. In terms of the overall economy, we will see somewhat slower growth in the first quarter than we otherwise would, but I expect that to be made up in the second quarter, as long as we avoid another shutdown. The shutdown came at a time when people were already feeling a bit uneasy. In the fourth quarter of last year, investor sentiment shifted and investors began putting significant weight on downside risks to the forecast. As a result, there was a sharp increase in volatility, a decline in equity prices, and an increase in the credit spread of corporate bond yields relative to Treasury yields. It reminded me of Bette Davis’s line in All About Eve: “Fasten your seatbelts; it’s going to be a bumpy night.” Since the start of the year, conditions in financial markets have eased, although they remain tighter than they were last fall. The shift in sentiment is a good reminder that the economy is dynamic and can take unexpected turns. While we all have to look forward and make our best assessment of how the economy is doing, we also have to be ready to change those views should the incoming information warrant it. Although surveys of households and businesses indicate they are less confident about the economy than they were, much of the incoming data are consistent with slower but still solid growth. Household incomes have been rising, reflecting the strength of the job market and lower taxes. In the aggregate, households have been able to increase savings and their debt levels are manageable, making for sound balance sheets. These factors have been supporting solid consumer spending. Lower equity prices and higher volatility no doubt add an air of caution, but many households benefit from lower oil and gasoline prices. Consumer spending is over two-thirds of output, so we will need to keep a close eye on whether household sentiment weakens so much that people postpone spending or whether they remain cautiously optimistic and continue to spend. The housing market has slowed over the past year. The 30-year mortgage rate moved up nearly 1 percentage point from late 2017 to late 2018, and house price appreciation continues to exceed income 4 growth, making affordability an issue for many households. Looking forward, the tax changes contain several provisions that affect homeownership. There is a limit on the deduction for state and local taxes, which includes property taxes, and a limit on the deduction for mortgage interest, both of which will affect those taxpayers who continue to itemize deductions. On the other hand, strong labor markets mean more people are now in the position to make the commitment to purchase a home. On balance, I don’t expect housing to contribute much to economic growth this year, but I don’t expect to see a sharp pullback in the sector either. Business spending was quite strong in the first half of last year, supported by strong earnings growth and changes in tax policy that included lower corporate tax rates and full expensing of investment in equipment and intangibles. But business spending moderated in the second half of the year, as financial conditions tightened and uncertainty over tariffs, trade policy, and growth abroad began to weigh on manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Lower energy prices benefit consumers, but they tend to dampen mining and drilling investment. I don’t expect the drag on investment in this sector to be nearly as large as in 2015-2016, unless energy prices fall considerably more. While the Fed’s monetary policy goals pertain to the U.S. economy, how economies in the rest of the world fare can spill over to the U.S. through trade and financial markets. Growth abroad, including China and Europe, is expected to slow this year, but there is some uncertainty around how much of a slowdown there will be. The path and outcome of Brexit add further uncertainty, as does the outcome of trade and tariff negotiations. Indeed, some of the slowdown abroad is likely related to changes in and uncertainty over trade policy. China is Ohio’s third largest export destination, after Canada and Mexico, and Ohio’s largest import source. The majority of our business contacts continue to report that while their concerns about trade policy and global growth are rising, their investment plans remain intact. But some larger multinational firms have become more hesitant, and several manufacturing contacts have said that the tariffs have been disruptive to their supply chains, forcing them to find alternative suppliers or face 5 increasing costs of production. You can think of the tariffs as a tax on inputs to U.S. production; they reduce profitability or are passed along to consumers in the form of higher prices. To the extent that the tariffs disrupt the most efficient use of resources, they are a headwind to longer-term productivity growth, which has already been low during the expansion. Should the slowdown in the economies of our major trading partners, including China and Germany, be sharper than expected or should the continued uncertainty persuade more firms to take a wait-and-see attitude, U.S. growth may slow more than anticipated. Of course, a favorable resolution to some of the uncertainty could buoy sentiment and foster a pickup in investment, leading to stronger than expected growth in the U.S. Overall, in my view the most likely outcome is that the economic expansion will continue this year, with growth moving down to a more sustainable pace, at or slightly above trend. But the move may not be a smooth one and there is uncertainty around the forecast. Slowing global growth, uncertainty over trade policy, tighter financial conditions, and the downturn in sentiment pose risks to this forecast and bear watching. Labor markets Strong economic growth like we have seen over the past few years is usually accompanied by strong labor market conditions, and 2018 was no exception. Last year, the economy added more than 2.6 million jobs, over 220,000 jobs per month, and more than 300,000 jobs were added in January. This is much stronger than the estimates of trend job growth, which range from 75,000 to 120,000 per month. The unemployment rate has been at or below 4.0 percent for almost a year, near the historical lows seen over the past 50 years. It seems unlikely that this low level can be maintained over the longer run. Business and labor contacts throughout the Cleveland Federal Reserve District, across a variety of industries, have been reporting to us for quite some time that it is very difficult to find workers across all skill levels. Some firms have shifted from looking for new hires to doing all they can to retain their current workers, including offering more flexible work schedules and raising wages. These anecdotal reports have shown 6 through to the national statistics. Aggregate measures of compensation are now in the 3 percent range, after being quite subdued earlier in the expansion. This is a welcome increase. It gives workers more purchasing power, but because the pickup has been in line with productivity growth and inflation, it has not added to inflationary pressures. Inflation The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. Our goal is symmetric, meaning that we don’t want to see inflation run either persistently above or persistently below this goal. There is always some short-term variation in the inflation measures, but monetary policymakers focus on the underlying medium- to long-term trends in inflation. After running below 2 percent for much of the expansion, inflation rates have firmed over the last several years. Last year, higher energy prices boosted headline PCE inflation above 2 percent, and the recent decline in energy prices will likely mean that inflation will move below 2 percent in the first part of the year. But the core inflation measures, which exclude food and energy prices, show that underlying trend inflation is essentially at the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. The key to this good performance is that expectations about inflation over the medium to longer term have been stable. This has kept inflation pressures at bay despite the tightness in labor markets, the strength of the economy, and reports from business contacts that they have more pricing power now than they have had in many years. Going forward, with appropriate adjustments in monetary policy that maintain stable inflation expectations, my outlook is that inflation will remain near our symmetric 2 percent goal. Before turning to monetary policy, let me say something about the regional economy. 7 The Regional Economy How the Cleveland region has fared over the economic expansion reflects not only trends in the national economy but also the region’s own transformation over the past couple of decades. From 1996 to 2008, the metro area lost about 3 percent of its population and more than 3 percent of its jobs. In contrast, Ohio’s population grew by 3 percent, and while the state didn’t add jobs, on net, it didn’t lose them either. The U.S., overall, did much better than either Cleveland or Ohio: population grew by 16 percent, and jobs grew by 14 percent, or a compounded rate of 1 percent per year. This better job growth meant that per capita income growth, adjusted for inflation, was stronger for the nation than for either Cleveland or Ohio. But recent trends have been more positive. Over the past five years, the regional economy has grown slowly but steadily, the population decline has slowed considerably, the metro area has been adding jobs, and real per capita income growth has been similar to that of the U.S. Demographics suggest that the region’s trend job growth will remain below that of the nation and our unemployment rate will be higher. But the metro area has benefited by becoming more diversified. In the 1990s, manufacturing represented almost 20 percent of Cleveland’s and Ohio’s jobs; that share has fallen to about 12 percent. Manufacturing is still a relatively more important sector here than in other parts of the country, so the region has been particularly affected by the downward trend in manufacturing employment.1 But the region now has specializations in healthcare, insurance, and business management, which should make it more resilient. Of course, this shift in sectoral mix presents a challenge: As the regional economy becomes less reliant on lower-skilled manufacturing, and more reliant on higher-skilled manufacturing and service-sector jobs, 1 In the U.S., the share of jobs in manufacturing has fallen from about 15 percent in the 1990s to about 8 percent today. 8 how can it ensure that its population acquires the necessary skills for jobs available now and in the future? Investments in education and training will be key.2 Cleveland is off to a good start. The metro area compares favorably with the nation, with a slightly higher percentage of high school graduates and a similar share of those with a bachelor’s degree or higher,3 and we are home to strong universities. Not all jobs will require a college degree. Cleveland Fed research indicates that compared to many parts of the country, Cleveland has a higher share of so-called “opportunity occupations.” These are jobs that pay above-median wages but don’t require a bachelor’s degree.4 These types of jobs still require training, but it often takes less time and money to transition into them. The area has a number of innovative training programs, including those offered at Cuyahoga Community College’s Manufacturing Technology Center, which I had the pleasure of touring. In addition to a skilled workforce, effective leadership and collaboration among businesses, government, nonprofits, and individuals have helped areas navigate economic transitions driven by technological 2 Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, in our District, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth and that counties with higher levels of high school graduates tend to have lower poverty rates and higher levels of labor force participation. See “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual-reports/ar-2005- perspective-on-75-years-of-state-income-growth/ar-200502-altered-states-essay.aspx) and Mark Schweitzer and Peter Rupert, “Understanding the Persistence of Poverty,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2006 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual- reports/ar-2006-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty/ar-200602-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty.aspx) 3 Of the population age 25 years and over, 27.3 percent in the U.S. and 29.5 percent in the Cleveland metro area earned a high school diploma as their terminal degree, and 30.9 percent in the U.S. and 30.2 percent in the Cleveland metro area earned a bachelor’s degree or higher. 4 The researchers found that roughly a third of the jobs in the Cleveland region are in opportunity occupations, almost 10 percentage points higher than for the nation as a whole. See Keith Wardrip, Kyle Fee, Lisa Nelson, and Stuart Andreason, “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies,” Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom- and-events/publications/special-reports/sr-20150909-identifying-opportunity-occupations.aspx) 9 change and globalization.5 So our region will benefit from the work of many of the people in this room, who are already dedicated to addressing workforce development issues so that Cleveland remains economically competitive in the future. Monetary Policy Let me conclude with a few more remarks on where monetary policy goes from here. Since December 2015, when the expansion was well underway, the FOMC has been gradually moving the policy rate up from the extraordinarily low level that was needed to address the Great Recession. Our policy rate is now at the lower end of the range of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, a level that neither stimulates nor restricts the economy and is consistent with maximum employment and price stability, and our most recent policy rate increases are still working themselves through the economy. In addition, we have also been letting the longer-term assets that we purchased to add accommodation during the recession gradually roll off the Fed’s balance sheet, and we have made considerable progress in bringing bank reserves down to more normal levels. As the FOMC announced last week, we plan to continue to use our current operating framework for implementing monetary policy, and at coming meetings, we will be finalizing our plans for ending the balance-sheet runoff and completing balance- sheet normalization. With respect to our monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, the economy is in a very good spot. Growth is slowing from an above-trend pace, and labor markets are strong. While the unemployment rate is lower than the level that is sustainable in the longer run, inflation is near 2 percent and does not show signs of appreciably rising. In my view, monetary policy does not appear to be far 5 “Reinvigorating Springfield’s Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities,” Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 09- 6, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1, 2009. (https://www.bostonfed.org/ - /media/Documents/Workingpapers/PDF/ppdp0906.pdf) 10 behind or far ahead of the curve. This environment gives us the opportunity to continue to gather information on the economy and assess our forecast and the risks, before making any further adjustments in the policy rate. If the economy performs along the lines that I’ve outlined as most likely, the fed funds rate may need to move a bit higher than current levels. But if some of the downside risks to the forecast manifest themselves, and the economy turns out to be weaker than expected and jeopardizes our dual mandate goals, I will need to adjust my outlook and policy views. While I cannot predict what the future will bring, there is one thing I can say with certainty: My colleagues and I on the FOMC will strive to bring the best analysis and judgment to our monetary policy decisions, doing our part to support a healthy economy on behalf of the public.

The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Financial Executives International and the Williams College of Business, Xavier University Cincinnati, OH February 12, 2019 1 Introduction I thank the Cincinnati chapter of Financial Executives International and the Williams College of Business at Xavier University for inviting me to speak this evening. This fall marks a milestone for Xavier University: the 50th anniversary of the opening of the undergraduate day program to women. My understanding is that the university has many activities planned to recognize the significant contributions women have made to Xavier and to the world at large. So this is an exciting time for me to be at Xavier University. In addition to being the home of Xavier, Cincinnati is also home to one of the branches of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Our other branch is in Pittsburgh, and our District includes the state of Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia. Many of you probably know that the Federal Reserve System comprises 12 regional Reserve Banks, distributed across the country, and the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. But we also have 24 branch offices. This regional structure helps us to collect information from around the country so that our monetary policy decisions can take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. I am very grateful for the many contacts throughout the Cleveland Fed’s District who generously share with us their insights into business activity, labor markets, and financial conditions. This timely information, collected through our surveys and in meetings of our advisory councils and boards of directors, is very helpful to me as I formulate my economic outlook and monetary policy views, which I’ll speak about tonight. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed. The National Economic Outlook Economic growth Congress has given the Fed its monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment. From the standpoint of those goals, the U.S. economy is doing very well. The economy has been growing at an 2 above-trend pace for the past couple of years, with estimates suggesting that growth was a strong 3 percent last year. Labor market conditions continue to be very strong, with above-trend job growth and very low unemployment. And after several years of being below-target, inflation has moved up and has been relatively stable around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. My expectation is that the economy will maintain its good performance in 2019. In my view, the most likely case is that we will see somewhat slower growth than we did last year, reflecting less of a boost from fiscal stimulus and less accommodative financial conditions. I expect growth to be at or slightly above trend, in the 2 to 2-1/2 percent range. Employment growth will also slow a bit, but it will remain strong enough to absorb those entering the workforce, and I expect the unemployment rate to remain at or below 4 percent. As this transition toward a sustainable pace occurs, I expect inflation to remain near 2 percent, with the usual transitory ups and downs. If this outlook comes to pass, we will chalk up 2019 as another very good year for the economy. But the path to sustainability is rarely smooth, and uncertainty is clouding the outlook. The partial shutdown of the federal government is a case in point. It caused significant hardships for the workers who weren’t getting paid and for businesses that rely on the parts of the government that weren’t operating. In terms of the overall economy, we will see somewhat slower growth in the first quarter than we otherwise would, but I expect that to be made up in the second quarter, as long as we avoid another shutdown. The shutdown came at a time when people were already feeling a bit uneasy. In the fourth quarter of last year, investor sentiment shifted and investors began putting significant weight on downside risks to the forecast. As a result, there was a sharp increase in volatility, a decline in equity prices, and an increase in the credit spread of corporate bond yields relative to Treasury yields. It was a good reminder that the economy is dynamic and can take unexpected turns. While we all have to look forward and make our best assessment of how the economy is doing, we also have to be ready to change those views should the incoming information warrant it. 3 Since the start of the year, conditions in financial markets have eased, although they remain tighter than they were last fall. Surveys indicate that households and businesses are less confident about the economy than they were, but so far, much of the incoming data are consistent with slower but still solid growth. Household incomes have been rising, reflecting the strength of the job market and lower taxes. In the aggregate, households have been able to increase savings and their debt levels are manageable, making for sound balance sheets. These factors have been supporting solid consumer spending, which is over two-thirds of output. Going forward, we will need to keep a close eye on whether household sentiment weakens so much that people postpone spending or whether they remain cautiously optimistic and continue to spend. The housing market has slowed over the past year. Affordability is becoming an issue because the 30- year mortgage rate has been trending up since mid-2016 and house price appreciation continues to exceed income growth. Looking forward, the tax changes contain several provisions that affect homeownership, including the limits on deductions for mortgage interest and for state and local taxes, which includes property taxes. On the other hand, strong labor markets mean more people are now in the position to make the commitment to purchase a home. On balance, I don’t expect housing to contribute much to economic growth this year, but I don’t expect to see a sharp pullback in the sector either. Business spending was quite strong in the first half of last year, supported by strong earnings growth and changes in tax policy that included lower corporate tax rates and full expensing of investment in equipment and intangibles. But business spending moderated in the second half of the year, as financial conditions tightened and uncertainty over tariffs, trade policy, and growth abroad began to weigh on manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Sometimes I am asked why the Fed takes into account how other economies are doing when our monetary policy goals pertain to the U.S. economy. The answer is because how economies in the rest of the world 4 fare can spill over to the U.S. through trade and financial markets. Growth abroad, including China and Europe, is expected to slow this year, but there is some uncertainty around how much of a slowdown there will be. The path and outcome of Brexit add further uncertainty, as does the outcome of trade and tariff negotiations. Indeed, some of the slowdown abroad is likely related to changes in and uncertainty over trade policy. So far, the majority of our business contacts continue to report that while their concerns about trade policy and global growth are rising, their investment plans remain intact. But some larger multinational firms have become more hesitant, and several manufacturing contacts have said that the tariffs have been disruptive to their supply chains, forcing them to find alternative suppliers or face increasing costs of production. Should the slowdown in the economies of our major trading partners, including China and Germany, be sharper than expected or should the continued uncertainty persuade more firms to take a wait-and-see attitude, U.S. growth may slow more than anticipated. Of course, a favorable resolution to some of the uncertainty could buoy sentiment and lead to a pickup in investment and stronger than expected growth in the U.S. Overall, in my view the most likely outcome is that the economic expansion will continue this year, with growth moving down to a more sustainable pace, at or slightly above trend, but the risks around the forecast, including slowing global growth, uncertainty over trade policy, tighter financial conditions, and the changes in business and consumer sentiment, bear watching. Labor markets The strong economic growth we have experienced over the past few years has been accompanied by strong labor market conditions. Last year, the economy added more than 2.6 million jobs; that’s over 220,000 jobs per month. In January, payrolls rose by more than 300,000 jobs. This is much stronger than trend job growth, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 per month. The unemployment rate has been at or below 4.0 percent for almost a year, which is near the historical lows seen over the past 50 years. It seems unlikely that this low level can be maintained over the longer run. 5 Our business and labor contacts, across a variety of industries, have been reporting to us for quite some time that it is very difficult to find workers across all skill levels. Some firms have shifted from looking for new hires to doing all they can to retain their current workers, including offering more flexible work schedules and raising wages. These anecdotal reports have shown through to the national statistics. Aggregate measures of compensation are now in the 3 percent range, after being quite subdued earlier in the expansion. This is a welcome increase. It gives workers more purchasing power, but because the pickup has been in line with productivity growth and inflation, it has not added to inflationary pressures. Inflation The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. Our goal is symmetric, meaning that we don’t want to see inflation run either persistently above or persistently below this goal. When assessing where the economy is relative to our goal, monetary policymakers look through short- term variations in the inflation measures and focus on the underlying medium- to long-term trends in inflation. After running below 2 percent for much of the expansion, inflation rates have firmed over the last several years. Last year, higher energy prices boosted headline PCE inflation above 2 percent, and the recent decline in energy prices will likely mean that inflation will move below 2 percent in the first part of the year. But the core inflation measures, which exclude food and energy prices, show that underlying trend inflation is essentially at the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. The key to this good performance is that expectations about inflation over the medium to longer term have been stable. This has kept inflation pressures at bay despite the tightness in labor markets, the strength of the economy, and reports from business contacts that they have more pricing power now than they have had in many years. Going forward, with appropriate adjustments in monetary policy that maintain stable inflation expectations, my outlook is that inflation will remain near our symmetric 2 percent goal. 6 Before turning to monetary policy, let me say something about the regional economy. The Regional Economy The Cincinnati metropolitan area continues to experience some of the best economic performance in the Cleveland Fed District, and this performance has been aided by solid longer-term fundamentals. For example, from 1996 to 2008, in the Cincinnati metro area, population and jobs each grew by about 11 percent. This was about two-thirds of the growth rate of population and about three-quarters of the growth rate of jobs for the U.S. as a whole.1 But Cincinnati’s performance compares very favorably to that of the Cleveland metro area, which lost about 3 percent of its population and more than 3 percent of its jobs over the same time period, and with the state of Ohio, which gained 3 percent in population, but showed no job gains, on net. This better job growth meant that per capita income growth, adjusted for inflation, was stronger in Cincinnati than in either Cleveland or Ohio. Since the expansion began in June 2009, the relative economic performance of Cincinnati has remained solid. While Cincinnati’s population growth has not been as strong as the nation’s, its job growth and real personal income growth have been. On net, payroll jobs are 13 percent higher than they were when the expansion started, and the metro area’s unemployment rate, which peaked at 10.5 in the aftermath of the recession, has fallen to 4.2 percent, just slightly higher than the nation’s. This is strong labor market performance. Research shows that regions that are resilient, that is, regions that have been able to avoid persistent declines in population over the long run, tend to have a more diverse industry mix and a more educated 1 From 1996 to 2008, population grew by 16 percent and payroll jobs grew by 14 percent for the U.S. as a whole. 7 population.2 Cincinnati scores well on both counts. Cincinnati has become less reliant on manufacturing jobs than it was in the past. In the 1990s, manufacturing represented 16 percent of Cincinnati’s jobs; that share has now fallen to about 11 percent.3 The region has been adding jobs in finance and banking, as well as healthcare. Hospitals are expanding, and there have been substantial venture capital investments in health information technology and pharmaceuticals. Education is the key to helping ensure that a region’s population acquires the necessary skills for the jobs available now and in the future.4 In terms of education, the Cincinnati metro area compares quite favorably with the nation, with higher percentages of high school graduates and of those with a bachelor’s degree or further education.5 In addition, it is home to Xavier and other strong colleges and universities. Not all jobs will require a college degree. Cleveland Fed research indicates that compared to many parts of the country, Cincinnati has a higher share of so-called “opportunity occupations.” These are jobs that pay above-median wages but don’t require a bachelor’s degree. 6 These types of jobs still require training, 2 Jeffrey Lin, “Regional Resilience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 13-1, December 17, 2012. (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13- 1.pdf?la=en) 3 In the U.S., the share of jobs in manufacturing has fallen from about 15 percent in the 1990s to about 8 percent today. The comparable declines in shares were from 20 percent to about 12 percent in Ohio and from 18 percent to 13 percent in Kentucky. 4 Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, in our District, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth and that counties with higher levels of high school graduates tend to have lower poverty rates and higher levels of labor force participation. See “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual-reports/ar-2005- perspective-on-75-years-of-state-income-growth/ar-200502-altered-states-essay.aspx) and Mark Schweitzer and Peter Rupert, “Understanding the Persistence of Poverty,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2006 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual- reports/ar-2006-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty/ar-200602-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty.aspx) 5 Of the population age 25 years and over, 87.3 percent in the U.S. and 90.4 percent in the Cincinnat i metro area have earned a high school diploma or higher; 27.3 percent in the U.S. and 30.0 percent in the Cincinnati metro area earned a high school diploma as their terminal degree, and 30.9 percent in the U.S. and 32.4 percent in the Cincinnati metro area earned a bachelor’s degree or higher. 6 The researchers found that about 30 percent of the jobs in the Cincinnati region are in opportunity occupations, somewhat higher than for the nation as a whole. See Keith Wardrip, Kyle Fee, Lisa Nelson, and Stuart Andreason, “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies,” Federal Reserve Banks of 8 but it often takes less time and money to transition into them. In addition to a skilled workforce, effective leadership and collaboration among businesses, government, nonprofits, and individuals have helped areas navigate economic transitions driven by technological change and globalization.7 Workforce development will have to remain an important focus of civic and business leaders in the region to ensure that Cincinnati will be able to extend its solid economic performance into the future. Now that I have given you a sense of my outlook for the economy, let me conclude with some remarks on monetary policy. Monetary Policy Since December 2015, when the expansion was well underway, the FOMC has been gradually moving the policy rate up from the extraordinarily low level that was needed to address the Great Recession. At its January meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate, our policy rate, at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, and we have adopted a wait-and-see approach regarding future rate adjustments. I fully supported this decision because I believe that policy, for the time being, is well-calibrated to the economic outlook and the risks around that outlook. Our policy rate is now at the lower end of the range of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, a level that neither stimulates nor restricts the economy and is consistent with maximum employment and price stability, and our most recent policy rate increases are still working themselves through the economy. Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/special-reports/sr-20150909-identifying-opportunity-occupations.aspx) 7 “Reinvigorating Springfield’s Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities,” Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 09- 6, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1, 2009. (https://www.bostonfed.org/- /media/Documents/Workingpapers/PDF/ppdp0906.pdf) 9 With respect to our monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, the economy is in a very good spot. Growth is slowing from an above-trend pace, and labor markets are strong. While the unemployment rate is lower than the level that is sustainable in the longer run, inflation is near 2 percent and does not show signs of appreciably rising. In my view, monetary policy does not appear to be far behind or far ahead of the curve. This environment gives us the opportunity to continue to gather information on the economy and assess our forecast and the risks, before making any further adjustments in the policy rate. If the economy performs along the lines that I’ve outlined as most likely, the fed funds rate may need to move a bit higher than current levels. But if some of the downside risks to the forecast manifest themselves, and the economy turns out to be weaker than expected and jeopardizes our dual mandate goals, I will need to adjust my outlook and policy views. In addition to bringing interest rates up to more normal levels, since October 2017, the FOMC has also been letting the longer-term assets that we purchased to add accommodation during the financial crisis and Great Recession gradually roll off the Fed’s balance sheet, and we have made considerable progress in bringing bank reserves down to more normal levels. As the FOMC announced in January, we plan to continue to use our current operating framework for implementing monetary policy. Our current operating framework, sometimes called a floor system or an abundant reserves system, differs from the framework we used prior to the financial crisis and Great Recession. In July 2007, the Fed was holding less than $900 billion on the asset side of its balance sheet. On the liability side, banks were holding about $10 billion in reserve accounts at the Fed. With reserves this scarce, the FOMC could make small changes in the supply of reserves by buying or selling short-term Treasuries. This, coupled with estimates of the demand for reserves, allowed the FOMC to ensure that the market-clearing interest rate at which banks lend reserves to each other overnight, the fed funds rate, was maintained at the FOMC’s target. 10 But during the financial crisis and Great Recession, once our policy rate was brought down to essentially zero, to add further monetary accommodation, the FOMC began purchasing longer-term assets in order to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates.8 As a result of these purchases, the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet swelled, to over $4.5 trillion at the peak in January 2015, a five-fold increase. Reserves and currency are the main liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet. As assets rose, so did reserves, peaking at $2.8 trillion in October 2014, with most of this in excess of that required to meet regulatory reserve requirements. At such ample reserve levels, small changes in the supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate, and the FOMC began implementing monetary policy in a new way. In particular, in October 2008 Congress gave the Fed the authority to pay interest on the reserve balances that banks and other depository institutions hold at the Fed. So the FOMC began bringing the fed funds rate into its target range using the rate the Fed pays on excess reserves and using overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which help put a floor on the fed funds rate. Raising the interest rate on excess reserves puts upward pressure on the fed funds rate because banks are unlikely to accept a rate in the market lower than the one they can get by depositing their funds at the Fed. Overnight reverse repos, or ON RRPs, involve the Fed selling securities from its large portfolio of assets with an agreement to buy them back the next day at a pre-determined price from eligible counterparties, including banks, primary dealers, money market funds, and government-sponsored enterprises. By offering a safe overnight asset to a broader array of money market participants, some of whom are not eligible to receive interest on reserves, overnight reverse repos help put a firmer floor on the fed funds rate because these counterparties should be reluctant to lend their 8 In general, studies find that the Fed’s various asset purchase programs have lowered longer -term yields. For a review of the empirical evidence, see Stanley Fischer, “Conducting Monetary Policy with a Large Balance Sheet,” remarks at the 2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 27, 2015. (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20150227a.pdf) 11 liquidity in the market at rates lower than what they could get at the Fed. This abundant reserves, or floor, system does not require the FOMC to actively manage the supply of reserves, so it is easier to implement, and it has given the FOMC effective control of interest rates. The FOMC plans to continue to use this system to implement policy. The Fed’s balance sheet will be larger than it was before the financial crisis. This is so not only because of this implementation framework, but also because the public’s demand for currency is rising over time and because banks’ demand for reserves has increased because of their own risk-management needs and in response to regulatory changes put in place since the crisis. Even so, the balance sheet will be considerably smaller than it was at its post-crisis peak, and we have made considerable progress in normalizing it. Assets held by the Fed are now about $4 trillion, down about $0.5 trillion, or over 10 percent, since their peak, and reserves are now about $1.6 trillion, down about $1.2 trillion, or over 40 percent, since their peak. At coming meetings, we will be finalizing our plans for ending the balance-sheet runoff and completing balance-sheet normalization. As we have done throughout the process of normalization, we will make these plans and the rationale for them known to the public in a timely way because transparency and accountability are basic tenets of appropriate monetary policymaking.

The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland University of Kentucky Gatton College of Business and Economics 2019 Economic Outlook Conference Lexington, KY February 13, 2019 The remarks on the national economy and monetary policy are the same as those delivered February 12, 2019. 1 Introduction I thank the University of Kentucky’s Gatton College of Business and Economics for inviting me to participate in the 2019 Economic Outlook Conference. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland is pleased to have a productive, ongoing relationship with the Gatton College, including co-sponsorship of annual workshops and seminars presented by Gatton faculty and Cleveland Fed researchers. I am especially looking forward to hearing the other speakers’ take on the economy and the question and answer portion of the program because as we navigate through the year, we will need to be particularly attuned to what is happening on the ground. As many of you probably know, Lexington falls within the Cleveland Fed’s District, which includes the state of Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia. The Cleveland Fed is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks distributed across the country that, along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise the Federal Reserve System. This regional structure helps us to collect information from around the country so that our monetary policy decisions can take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. I am very grateful for the many contacts throughout our District who generously share with us their insights into business activity, labor markets, and financial conditions. This timely information is collected through our surveys and in meetings of our advisory councils and boards of directors. We have a business advisory council here in Lexington, and I would like to thank Dr. Ken Troske for serving on the group. The information he and his colleagues provide is very helpful to me as I formulate my economic outlook and monetary policy views, which I’ll speak about today. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed. 2 The National Economic Outlook Economic growth Congress has given the Fed its monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment. From the standpoint of those goals, the U.S. economy is doing very well. The economy has been growing at an above-trend pace for the past couple of years, with estimates suggesting that growth was a strong 3 percent last year. Labor market conditions continue to be very strong, with above-trend job growth and very low unemployment. And after several years of being below-target, inflation has moved up and has been relatively stable around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. My expectation is that the economy will maintain its good performance in 2019. In my view, the most likely case is that we will see somewhat slower growth than we did last year, reflecting less of a boost from fiscal stimulus and less accommodative financial conditions. I expect growth to be at or slightly above trend, in the 2 to 2-1/2 percent range. Employment growth will also slow a bit, but it will remain strong enough to absorb those entering the workforce, and I expect the unemployment rate to remain at or below 4 percent. As this transition toward a sustainable pace occurs, I expect inflation to remain near 2 percent, with the usual transitory ups and downs. If this outlook comes to pass, we will chalk up 2019 as another very good year for the economy. But the path to sustainability is rarely smooth, and uncertainty is clouding the outlook. The partial shutdown of the federal government is a case in point. It caused significant hardships for the workers who weren’t getting paid and for businesses that rely on the parts of the government that weren’t operating. In terms of the overall economy, we will see somewhat slower growth in the first quarter than we otherwise would, but I expect that to be made up in the second quarter, as long as we avoid another shutdown. The shutdown came at a time when people were already feeling a bit uneasy. In the fourth quarter of last year, investor sentiment shifted and investors began putting significant weight on downside risks to the forecast. As a result, there was a sharp increase in volatility, a decline in equity prices, and an increase in 3 the credit spread of corporate bond yields relative to Treasury yields. It was a good reminder that the economy is dynamic and can take unexpected turns. While we all have to look forward and make our best assessment of how the economy is doing, we also have to be ready to change those views should the incoming information warrant it. Since the start of the year, conditions in financial markets have eased, although they remain tighter than they were last fall. Surveys indicate that households and businesses are less confident about the economy than they were, but so far, much of the incoming data are consistent with slower but still solid growth. Household incomes have been rising, reflecting the strength of the job market and lower taxes. In the aggregate, households have been able to increase savings and their debt levels are manageable, making for sound balance sheets. These factors have been supporting solid consumer spending, which is over two-thirds of output. Going forward, we will need to keep a close eye on whether household sentiment weakens so much that people postpone spending or whether they remain cautiously optimistic and continue to spend. The housing market has slowed over the past year. Affordability is becoming an issue because the 30- year mortgage rate has been trending up since mid-2016 and house price appreciation continues to exceed income growth. Looking forward, the tax changes contain several provisions that affect homeownership, including the limits on deductions for mortgage interest and for state and local taxes, which includes property taxes. On the other hand, strong labor markets mean more people are now in the position to make the commitment to purchase a home. On balance, I don’t expect housing to contribute much to economic growth this year, but I don’t expect to see a sharp pullback in the sector either. Business spending was quite strong in the first half of last year, supported by strong earnings growth and changes in tax policy that included lower corporate tax rates and full expensing of investment in equipment and intangibles. But business spending moderated in the second half of the year, as financial 4 conditions tightened and uncertainty over tariffs, trade policy, and growth abroad began to weigh on manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Sometimes I am asked why the Fed takes into account how other economies are doing when our monetary policy goals pertain to the U.S. economy. The answer is because how economies in the rest of the world fare can spill over to the U.S. through trade and financial markets. Growth abroad, including China and Europe, is expected to slow this year, but there is some uncertainty around how much of a slowdown there will be. The path and outcome of Brexit add further uncertainty, as does the outcome of trade and tariff negotiations. Indeed, some of the slowdown abroad is likely related to changes in and uncertainty over trade policy. So far, the majority of our business contacts continue to report that while their concerns about trade policy and global growth are rising, their investment plans remain intact. But some larger multinational firms have become more hesitant, and several manufacturing contacts have said that the tariffs have been disruptive to their supply chains, forcing them to find alternative suppliers or face increasing costs of production. Should the slowdown in the economies of our major trading partners, including China and Germany, be sharper than expected or should the continued uncertainty persuade more firms to take a wait-and-see attitude, U.S. growth may slow more than anticipated. Of course, a favorable resolution to some of the uncertainty could buoy sentiment and lead to a pickup in investment and stronger than expected growth in the U.S. Overall, in my view the most likely outcome is that the economic expansion will continue this year, with growth moving down to a more sustainable pace, at or slightly above trend, but the risks around the forecast, including slowing global growth, uncertainty over trade policy, tighter financial conditions, and the changes in business and consumer sentiment, bear watching. Labor markets The strong economic growth we have experienced over the past few years has been accompanied by 5 strong labor market conditions. Last year, the economy added more than 2.6 million jobs; that’s over 220,000 jobs per month. In January, payrolls rose by more than 300,000 jobs. This is much stronger than trend job growth, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 per month. The unemployment rate has been at or below 4.0 percent for almost a year, which is near the historical lows seen over the past 50 years. It seems unlikely that this low level can be maintained over the longer run. Our business and labor contacts, across a variety of industries, have been reporting to us for quite some time that it is very difficult to find workers across all skill levels. Some firms have shifted from looking for new hires to doing all they can to retain their current workers, including offering more flexible work schedules and raising wages. These anecdotal reports have shown through to the national statistics. Aggregate measures of compensation are now in the 3 percent range, after being quite subdued earlier in the expansion. This is a welcome increase. It gives workers more purchasing power, but because the pickup has been in line with productivity growth and inflation, it has not added to inflationary pressures. Inflation The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. Our goal is symmetric, meaning that we don’t want to see inflation run either persistently above or persistently below this goal. When assessing where the economy is relative to our goal, monetary policymakers look through short- term variations in the inflation measures and focus on the underlying medium- to long-term trends in inflation. After running below 2 percent for much of the expansion, inflation rates have firmed over the last several years. Last year, higher energy prices boosted headline PCE inflation above 2 percent, and the recent decline in energy prices will likely mean that inflation will move below 2 percent in the first part of the year. But the core inflation measures, which exclude food and energy prices, show that underlying trend inflation is essentially at the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. The key to this good performance is that 6 expectations about inflation over the medium to longer term have been stable. This has kept inflation pressures at bay despite the tightness in labor markets, the strength of the economy, and reports from business contacts that they have more pricing power now than they have had in many years. Going forward, with appropriate adjustments in monetary policy that maintain stable inflation expectations, my outlook is that inflation will remain near our symmetric 2 percent goal. Before turning to monetary policy, let me say something about the regional economy. The Regional Economy The Lexington metropolitan area has shown some of the strongest economic performance in the Cleveland Fed’s District, and this performance has been aided by strong longer-term fundamentals. For example, from 1996 to 2008, the Lexington metro area saw a strong 20 percent increase in population, about double that of the state of Kentucky, and stronger than the 16 percent pace seen for the U.S. as a whole. This strong population growth was accompanied by solid job growth of 11 percent, somewhat higher than what the state saw, though not quite as high as the national pace. 1 Lexington’s performance compares very favorably to that of the Cleveland metro area, which lost about 3 percent of its population and more than 3 percent of its jobs over the same time period. Since the expansion began in June 2009, the relative economic performance of Lexington has remained solid. Both population growth and job growth in the Lexington metro area have significantly outpaced the nation’s. On net, payroll jobs are about 18 percent higher than they were when the expansion started. The metro area’s unemployment rate peaked at 8.8 percent in the aftermath of the recession, well below the 10 percent peak seen for the nation as a whole. Lexington’s unemployment rate is now down to 3.3 percent, well below the nation’s 4 percent rate. The one place where Lexington has not kept pace with 1 From 1996 to 2008, payroll jobs grew by 14 percent in the U.S. and by about 10 percent in Kentucky. 7 the nation is in real per capita income growth. It has been rising over the expansion, but only between a half and two-thirds of the national pace. Research shows that regions that are resilient, that is, regions that have been able to avoid persistent declines in population over the long run, tend to have a more diverse industry mix and a more educated population. 2 Lexington scores well on both counts. Like many parts of the Cleveland Fed’s District, historically manufacturing has accounted for a relatively larger share of the Lexington metro area’s jobs compared to the nation. That is still true, but over time, Lexington’s industry mix has become more diversified. In the 1990s, manufacturing represented 16 percent of Lexington’s jobs; that share has now fallen to about 11 percent.3 In addition to manufacturing, the mining and government sectors also represent a larger share of jobs in Lexington than they do at the national level. But over the expansion, the region has been adding jobs in education, healthcare, and professional and business services. Education is the key to helping ensure that a region’s population acquires the necessary skills for the jobs available now and in the future. 4 In terms of education, the Lexington metro area compares quite favorably with the nation, with a higher percentage of the population having earned a bachelor’s degree or 2 Jeffrey Lin, “Regional Resilience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 13-1, December 17, 2012. (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13- 1.pdf?la=en) 3 In the U.S., the share of jobs in manufacturing has fallen from about 15 percent in the 1990s to about 8 percent today. The comparable declines in shares were from 20 percent to about 12 percent in Ohio and from 18 percent to 13 percent in Kentucky. 4 Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, in our District, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth and that counties with higher levels of high school graduates tend to have lower poverty rates and higher levels of labor force participation. See “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual-reports/ar-2005- perspective-on-75-years-of-state-income-growth/ar-200502-altered-states-essay.aspx) and Mark Schweitzer and Peter Rupert, “Understanding the Persistence of Poverty,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2006 Annual Report. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/annual- reports/ar-2006-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty/ar-200602-understanding-the-persistence-of-poverty.aspx) 8 further education.5 Lexington benefits from having the University of Kentucky right here, as well as other strong colleges in the region. Not all jobs will require a college degree. Cleveland Fed research indicates that compared to other parts of the country, Lexington has a somewhat higher share of so-called “opportunity occupations.” These are jobs that pay above-median wages but don’t require a bachelor’s degree.6 These types of jobs still require training, but it often takes less time and money to transition into them. In addition to a skilled workforce, effective leadership and collaboration among businesses, government, nonprofits, and individuals have helped areas navigate economic transitions driven by technological change and globalization. 7 Workforce development will need to remain an important focus of civic and business leaders in the region to ensure that Lexington will be able to extend its solid economic performance into the future. Now that I have given you a sense of my outlook for the economy, let me conclude with some remarks on monetary policy. Monetary Policy Since December 2015, when the expansion was well underway, the FOMC has been gradually moving the policy rate up from the extraordinarily low level that was needed to address the Great Recession. At its January meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate, our policy rate, 5 Of the population age 25 years and over, 87.3 percent in the U.S. and 89.3 percent in the Lexington metro area have earned a high school diploma or higher; 27.3 percent in the U.S. and 24.6 percent in the Lexington metro area have earned a high school diploma as their terminal degree; and 30.9 percent in the U.S. and 36.2 percent in the Lexington metro area earned a bachelor’s degree or higher. 6 The researchers found that about 30 percent of the jobs in the Lexington region are in opportunity occupations, somewhat higher than for the nation as a whole. See Keith Wardrip, Kyle Fee, Lisa Nelson, and Stuart Andreason, “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies,” Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/special-reports/sr-20150909-identifying-opportunity-occupations.aspx) 7 “Reinvigorating Springfield’s Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities,” Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 09- 6, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1, 2009. (https://www.bostonfed.org/- /media/Documents/Workingpapers/PDF/ppdp0906.pdf) 9 at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, and we have adopted a wait-and-see approach regarding future rate adjustments. I fully supported this decision because I believe that policy, for the time being, is well-calibrated to the economic outlook and the risks around that outlook. Our policy rate is now at the lower end of the range of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, a level that neither stimulates nor restricts the economy and is consistent with maximum employment and price stability, and our most recent policy rate increases are still working themselves through the economy. With respect to our monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, the economy is in a very good spot. Growth is slowing from an above-trend pace, and labor markets are strong. While the unemployment rate is lower than the level that is sustainable in the longer run, inflation is near 2 percent and does not show signs of appreciably rising. In my view, monetary policy does not appear to be far behind or far ahead of the curve. This environment gives us the opportunity to continue to gather information on the economy and assess our forecast and the risks, before making any further adjustments in the policy rate. If the economy performs along the lines that I’ve outlined as most likely, the fed funds rate may need to move a bit higher than current levels. But if some of the downside risks to the forecast manifest themselves, and the economy turns out to be weaker than expected and jeopardizes our dual mandate goals, I will need to adjust my outlook and policy views. In addition to bringing interest rates up to more normal levels, since October 2017, the FOMC has also been letting the longer-term assets that we purchased to add accommodation during the financial crisis and Great Recession gradually roll off the Fed’s balance sheet, and we have made considerable progress in bringing bank reserves down to more normal levels. As the FOMC announced in January, we plan to continue to use our current operating framework for implementing monetary policy. 10 Our current operating framework, sometimes called a floor system or an abundant reserves system, differs from the framework we used prior to the financial crisis and Great Recession. In July 2007, the Fed was holding less than $900 billion on the asset side of its balance sheet. On the liability side, banks were holding about $10 billion in reserve accounts at the Fed. With reserves this scarce, the FOMC could make small changes in the supply of reserves by buying or selling short-term Treasuries. This, coupled with estimates of the demand for reserves, allowed the FOMC to ensure that the market-clearing interest rate at which banks lend reserves to each other overnight, the fed funds rate, was maintained at the FOMC’s target. But during the financial crisis and Great Recession, once our policy rate was brought down to essentially zero, to add further monetary accommodation, the FOMC began purchasing longer-term assets in order to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates.8 As a result of these purchases, the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet swelled, to over $4.5 trillion at the peak in January 2015, a five-fold increase. Reserves and currency are the main liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet. As assets rose, so did reserves, peaking at $2.8 trillion in October 2014, with most of this in excess of that required to meet regulatory reserve requirements. At such ample reserve levels, small changes in the supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate, and the FOMC began implementing monetary policy in a new way. In particular, in October 2008 Congress gave the Fed the authority to pay interest on the reserve balances that banks and other depository institutions hold at the Fed. So the FOMC began bringing the fed funds rate into its target 8 In general, studies find that the Fed’s various asset purchase programs have lowered longer-term yields. For a review of the empirical evidence, see Stanley Fischer, “Conducting Monetary Policy with a Large Balance Sheet,” remarks at the 2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 27, 2015. (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20150227a.pdf) 11 range using the rate the Fed pays on excess reserves and using overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which help put a floor on the fed funds rate. Raising the interest rate on excess reserves puts upward pressure on the fed funds rate because banks are unlikely to accept a rate in the market lower than the one they can get by depositing their funds at the Fed. Overnight reverse repos, or ON RRPs, involve the Fed selling securities from its large portfolio of assets with an agreement to buy them back the next day at a pre-determined price from eligible counterparties, including banks, primary dealers, money market funds, and government-sponsored enterprises. By offering a safe overnight asset to a broader array of money market participants, some of whom are not eligible to receive interest on reserves, overnight reverse repos help put a firmer floor on the fed funds rate because these counterparties should be reluctant to lend their liquidity in the market at rates lower than what they could get at the Fed. This abundant reserves, or floor, system does not require the FOMC to actively manage the supply of reserves, so it is easier to implement, and it has given the FOMC effective control of interest rates. The FOMC plans to continue to use this system to implement policy. The Fed’s balance sheet will be larger than it was before the financial crisis. This is so not only because of this implementation framework, but also because the public’s demand for currency is rising over time and because banks’ demand for reserves has increased because of their own risk-management needs and in response to regulatory changes put in place since the crisis. Even so, the balance sheet will be considerably smaller than it was at its post-crisis peak, and we have made considerable progress in normalizing it. Assets held by the Fed are now about $4 trillion, down about $0.5 trillion, or over 10 percent, since their peak, and reserves are now about $1.6 trillion, down about $1.2 trillion, or over 40 percent, since their peak. At coming meetings, we will be finalizing our plans for ending the balance-sheet runoff and completing balance-sheet normalization. As we have done throughout the process of normalization, we will make these plans and the rationale for them known to the public in a timely way because transparency and accountability are basic tenets of appropriate monetary policymaking.

Home › Speeches 02.19.2019 Lyons Companies and the Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics, University of Delaware, Newark, DE I thank the University of Delaware and Lyons Companies for inviting me to speak today at your annual forum on the economic outlook. I spent a large part of my career in Philadelphia and had the pleasure of interacting with faculty and students from the University of Delaware on a number of occasions. So it is nice to be back. If I had to choose a banner headline, I would characterize 2019 as a year of transitions, for the economy, for monetary policy, and for how we communicate about policy. I would like to spend my time this morning on some of the factors affecting these transitions. The views I'll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economy Last year was another strong one for the U.S. economy. The economy has been growing at an above-trend pace for the past couple of years, with estimates suggesting that growth was a strong 3 percent in 2018. Growth has been supported by fiscal stimulus in the form of tax cuts and higher federal government spending, as well as accommodative financial conditions. Labor market conditions continue to be very strong. Last year, the economy added more than 2.6 million jobs; that's over 220,000 jobs per month. In January, payrolls rose by more than 300,000 jobs. The unemployment rate has been at or below 4.0 percent for almost a year, which is near the historical lows seen over the past 50 years and well below estimates of its sustainable level over the longer run. Along with this strong employment growth, wages have accelerated, and because the pickup has been in line with productivity growth and inflation, it has not added to inflationary pressures. After several years of being below-target, inflation moved up and has been relatively stable around the FOMC's 2 percent objective. So from the perspective of the Fed's congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, the U.S. economy has performed very well. To achieve this performance, since December 2015, when the expansion was well underway, the FOMC has been gradually moving our policy rate, the federal funds rate, up from the extraordinarily low level that was needed to address the Great Recession. The current target range for the federal funds rate is 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, which is at the bottom of the range of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, a level that neither stimulates nor restricts the economy and is consistent with maximum employment and price stability. In addition to bringing interest rates up to more normal levels, since October 2017, the FOMC has also been letting the longer-term assets that we purchased to add accommodation to address the financial crisis and Great Recession gradually roll off the Fed's balance sheet. The question is: where do the economy and monetary policy go from here? As I mentioned, I believe 2019 will be a year of transitions. Let me address the economy first, and then turn to policy and communications. My expectation is that the economy will maintain its good performance in 2019. Underlying economic fundamentals remain sound. Household incomes have been rising, reflecting the strength of the job market and lower taxes. In the aggregate, households have been able to increase savings and their debt levels are manageable, making for sound balance sheets. Overall, the business sector also remains sound, with favorable profits and lower taxes supporting investment spending and hiring. In my view, the most likely case is that this year, the economy will transition from above-trend growth to a somewhat slower pace, in the 2 to 2-1/2 percent range, reflecting less of a boost from fiscal stimulus and less accommodative financial conditions. Employment growth will also slow a bit, but it will remain strong enough to absorb those entering the workforce, and I expect the unemployment rate to remain at or below 4 percent. As this transition toward a sustainable pace occurs, I expect inflation to remain near 2 percent, with the usual transitory ups and downs. But with all economic forecasts, there are risks. While the economy begins the year with sound fundamentals, it faces some cross-currents and headwinds. Surveys indicate that households and businesses are less confident about the economy than they were, and in the fourth quarter of last year, investor sentiment shifted and investors began putting significant weight on downside risks to the forecast. The increase in volatility, the decline in equity prices, and the increase in credit spreads of corporate bond yields relative to Treasury yields that occurred in the fourth quarter have partially reversed since the start of this year. But risks to the outlook remain. Growth abroad, including China and Europe, is expected to slow this year, but there is some uncertainty around how much of a slowdown there will be. The path and outcome of Brexit add further uncertainty, as does the outcome of U.S. trade and tariff negotiations. The Cleveland Federal Reserve District has greater exposure to trade, manufacturing, and motor vehicle production than other parts of the country. The majority of our business contacts report that while their concerns about trade policy and global growth are rising, they have not yet deferred or canceled planned investment because of the uncertainty. However, some firms, including larger multinational firms, have become more hesitant. Should the slowdown in the economies of our major trading partners, including China and Germany, be sharper than expected or should the continued uncertainty persuade more firms to take a wait-and-see attitude, U.S. growth may slow more than anticipated. Of course, a favorable resolution to some of the uncertainty could buoy sentiment and lead to a pickup in investment and stronger than expected growth in the U.S. Overall, in my view the most likely outcome is that the economic expansion will continue this year, with growth transitioning to a more sustainable pace, at or slightly above trend, but the risks around the forecast, including slowing global growth, uncertainty over trade policy, tighter financial conditions, and the changes in business and consumer sentiment, bear watching. Monetary Policy What does this mean for monetary policy? Similar to the economy's transition toward a more sustainable pace, monetary policy is also transitioning. At its January meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, and we have adopted a wait-and-see approach regarding future rate adjustments. I fully supported this decision because I believe that policy, for the time being, is well-calibrated to the economic outlook and the risks around that outlook. When the economy was growing well above trend, labor market conditions were continuing to tighten, inflation was moving to target, and the funds rate was very low, policy decisions were fairly straightforward. The FOMC's strategy was to continue to gradually reduce the extraordinary accommodation that had been put in place to address the Great Recession. Now we have entered a new phase — our policy decisions are less straightforward and we are transitioning back to normal monetary policymaking. The reduction in accommodation has brought our policy rate to the lower end of the range of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, although there is uncertainty around the exact level of the policy rate that is consistent with a neutral stance. In addition, our most recent policy rate increases are still working themselves through the economy, and we are gradually reducing the longer-term assets on our balance sheet, which likely is putting some upward pressure on term premia and, therefore, on longer-term interest rates. With respect to our monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, the economy is in a very good spot. Growth is slowing from an above-trend pace toward a more sustainable pace, and labor markets are strong. While the unemployment rate is lower than the level that is sustainable in the longer run, inflation is near 2 percent and does not show signs of appreciably rising. In my view, monetary policy does not appear to be far behind or far ahead of the curve. This environment gives us the opportunity to continue to gather information on the economy and assess our medium-run forecast and the risks around that forecast, before making any further adjustments in the policy rate. This information includes the official statistics, financial market indicators, the survey evidence on economic activity and sentiment, and reports from our regional contacts. The anecdotal information we gather from our contacts will be particularly useful in helping us understand household and business sentiment and how both sectors are dealing with some of the uncertainties clouding the outlook. If the economy performs along the lines that I've outlined as most likely, the fed funds rate may need to move a bit higher than current levels. But if some of the downside risks to the forecast manifest themselves, and the economy turns out to be weaker than expected and jeopardizes our dual mandate goals, I will need to adjust my outlook and policy views. So the economy is going to give us a good sense of whether policy is where it needs to be or whether further action is needed. In addition to normalizing interest rates, the FOMC has also been letting the longer-term assets on our balance sheet roll off, and bank reserves are down considerably from their peak level. As the FOMC announced in January, we plan to continue to use our current operating framework for implementing monetary policy. At coming meetings, we will be finalizing our plans for ending the balance-sheet runoff and completing balance-sheet normalization. 1 So with respect to both our policy rate setting and our balance sheet, we are transitioning back to normal monetary policymaking. Monetary Policy Communications And with this transition, our policy communications will be transitioning as well. The FOMC's communications about monetary policy decisions are important for a couple of reasons. First, while Congress has set the Fed's goals, it has also wisely given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. Insulating monetary policy decisions from short-run political interference but holding policymakers accountable for those decisions yields better economic outcomes. In order to be held accountable, policymakers need to explain their decisions, their assessment of economic conditions, and their outlook for the economy and the risks to the outlook. Clear communications also make monetary policy more effective. When households, businesses, and investors have a better sense of how monetary policy is likely to change conditional on the outlook, they can make better economic and financial decisions. In response to the Great Recession, the FOMC gave fairly explicit guidance about the future path of interest rates. With no further room to reduce interest rates, this forward guidance worked not only as a communication device but also as a policy tool. Reassuring the public that the fed funds rate would be kept very low until the economy improved put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and made monetary policy more accommodative. 2 As the economic expansion took hold, the FOMC no longer needed to use forward guidance as a policy tool to add monetary accommodation. Economic conditions and the outlook indicated that our policy rate would likely need to be on an upward path to promote our monetary policy goals. So in the interest of transparency, our policy statements still offered some guidance about this expected path of the federal funds rate. Now, as we approach normal policymaking, our communication needs to transition because there is less certainty about the future path of policy. The economy is dynamic, and the future path of policy will depend on how economic and financial conditions actually change over time. Those changes cannot be fully known in advance, so policy cannot be pre-set. Some have used the term "data-dependent" policymaking, but it is important to know what this term means and what it doesn't mean. It doesn't mean that policy will react to every short-run change in the data. Some shocks that hit the economy will result in an accumulation of information that changes the medium-run outlook for the economy and the risks around the outlook in such a way that monetary policy will want to respond. But some shocks will not materially change the outlook or policymakers' views of appropriate policy. "Data-dependent" also doesn't mean that policymakers will be unsystematic in their approach to policymaking. Policy needs to be flexible to respond to changes in economic and financial developments that inform the outlook, but the response should be fairly predictable and not a surprise if those developments occur. The communication challenge, then, is to give the public a good sense of how policy is likely to respond conditional on how the economy evolves without implying that policy is pre-committed to a particular path regardless of how the economy evolves. Our policy statement can help to do this if it does three things: (1) discusses a consistent set of factors that inform our outlook, risks, and progress toward our monetary policy goals; (2) describes how accumulated changes in those economic and financial conditions have or have not affected our outlook and risk assessment since our last meeting; and (3) points to this relationship between accumulated information and our outlook and risk assessment as the rationale for our policy decision The FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections can also help inform the public about the FOMC's outlook for the economy and policy, but it is very important to know what these projections are and what they are not. Four times a year, each FOMC participant submits projections of the most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and core inflation, conditional on the path of policy that each participant sees as likely to be appropriate for promoting our policy goals. The FOMC provides summary information, including the median, central tendency, and range of projections for each variable across participants, as well as a dot plot of information on the policy paths that individual FOMC participants view as appropriate. The median path provides a reasonable view across participants of the Committee's current assessment of appropriate policy given the state of the economy and expected developments. But this path is not a commitment. When economic and financial conditions evolve differently than expected, policy may need to be set differently than previously anticipated. This happened in both 2015 and 2016, when the FOMC ended up raising the funds rate fewer times than anticipated in the median projection made in March of those years. The fact that the dots can change over time because of economic developments is a design feature, not a flaw Included with the projections are charts illustrating the uncertainty bands around the median projections of each variable, including the median policy path. 3 These uncertainty bands deserve more attention. They are a good illustration of the reasonable amount of variation to expect in the projections. The bands get wider as the projection horizon extends because the future is uncertain and the economy can evolve in unexpected ways. The uncertainty band around the median policy path is a good reminder that policy is not pre-set. If the economy does evolve in an unanticipated way, policy will need to respond in an appropriate and systematic way. So our anticipated policy path may change over time as the economy evolves. But this is normal monetary policymaking. Summary In summary, 2019 will be a year of transitions for the economy, for monetary policy, and for monetary policy communications. In my view, the most likely case this year is that the economy will transition toward a more sustainable pace of growth, with continued strength in labor markets and inflation near 2 percent. But we must remain attentive to several risks to the outlook, including the slowdown in global growth, uncertainty over trade policy, tighter financial conditions, and the changes in business and consumer sentiment. We are transitioning toward normal monetary policymaking where the future path of policy is determined by how changes in economic and financial conditions affect the medium-run outlook and risks around that outlook. With the federal funds rate now at the lower end of the range of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral level and with monetary policy neither ahead of nor behind the curve, we can take the time to make that assessment. Our monetary policy communications are also transitioning with less emphasis on forward guidance about future interest rate moves and more focus on the economic and financial information that affects our medium-run outlook and on how policy is likely to respond to changes in the outlook and risks. Footnotes See Transcript of Chairman Powell's Press Conference, January 30, 2019. ( https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20190130.pdf ) Return to 1 For further discussion of the forms of forward guidance used by the FOMC, see Loretta J. Mester, "Recent Developments in U.S. Monetary Policy: From Extraordinary Back to Ordinary," remarks at the GIC Central Banking Series: New Policies for the Post-Crisis Era, Banque de France, Paris, France, March 23, 2015, ( https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20150323-recent-developments-in-us-monetary-policy ) and Loretta J. Mester, "Forward Guidance in Extraordinary Times, in Normal Times, and Betwixt the Two," Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc., New York, NY, November 6, 2014. ( https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20141106-forward-guidance-in-extraordinary-times.aspx ) Return to 2 The FOMC began providing charts with the confidence bands around the median projections in the March 2017 Summary of Economic Projections. For the latest charts, see the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee," December 18-19, 2018 ( https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20181219.pdf ) Return to 3 Suggested Citation Mester, Loretta J. “Transitions: The Economy, Monetary Policy, and Policy Communications.” Speech, Lyons Companies and the Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, February 19, 2019. Share

Increasing Diversity, Inclusion, and Opportunity in Economics: Perspectives of a Brown-Eyed Economist Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Second Annual Women in Economics Symposium Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis St. Louis, MO February 28, 2019 1 Introduction I thank the organizers and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for inviting me to speak at the second annual symposium on women in economics. The St. Louis Fed has been a leader within the Federal Reserve System in focusing attention on attracting and retaining the talents of women in the economics profession. The Bank’s series of podcasts with women in the field and this symposium have highlighted the challenges women face but also their successes. I believe that increasing awareness of what can be accomplished if one pursues an economics degree – that is, explaining “the value proposition” as they say in business – can play an important role in attracting people to the field of economics. I also believe we should not assume that people, even those in the profession, realize how significant the differences in outcomes for males and females in the profession are. So it is important to document and publicize the evidence that women and minorities are under-represented in economics, and to provide information on interventions that have been shown to help level the playing field. Today’s symposium does an excellent job on these scores. Thanks to the work of the St. Louis Fed and others, the Federal Reserve System is aware of where it stands in terms of diversity, it has a better understanding of the value of promoting a diverse culture, and the System is taking concrete steps to increase diversity, inclusion, and opportunity across the institution. Of course, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. I am sure that many of you are expecting me to start my remarks with a brief anecdote of how, at some point in my career, I was mistreated in some way because I am a woman. It is clear that this has happened to others and it is wrong, but I’ve been very lucky. In fact, I came into economics quite by accident. I didn’t start out to be an economist. I majored in mathematics at Barnard College but also pursued a second major in economics because it seemed interesting and didn’t require much additional course work. I applied to graduate school in math but ended up in the economics Ph.D. program at Princeton because two professors there – male professors, I might add – wrote to me explaining that Princeton’s economics program was very mathematical and encouraging me to come to Princeton and study economics. I’ve always thought that I lucked into economics. It has provided me with a fascinating 2 career, one that presents new questions to answer each day, and I hope that at least in a small way I’ve been able to provide some good in return through economic research and policymaking. Yet, economics as a field is not diverse. What Is the State of Diversity in Economics? Economics is a popular major in U.S. colleges and universities, but the field has had less success in attracting women or historically under-represented racial and ethnic minorities. While there has been some improvement compared to the 1970s, this under-representation has been going on for many years. Women earn between 30 and 35 percent of the bachelor’s degrees in economics, and this share has been relatively stable over the past two decades. 1 It is higher than the female share of bachelor’s degrees in some of the STEM fields, including computer sciences, and engineering and engineering technology, but lower than the female share of bachelor’s degrees conferred in the physical sciences and in mathematics and statistics.2 Across all fields, women earn more than half of all bachelor’s degrees awarded.3 This means women are choosing to major in economics at only a third of the rate of men.4 The numbers are lower for under-represented minorities, who earn slightly more than 20 percent of bachelor’s degrees and 1 Lundberg (2018) discusses the American Economic Association’s Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) 2017 survey results of economics departments. At the 126 schools CSWEP polled that have doctoral programs in economics, the female share of undergraduate senior s majoring in economics was about 35 percent in 2017, and it has varied between 30 and 35 percent since 1998; of these sc hools, those with higher ranked economics programs have a higher share of female undergraduate majors. Among the 113 schools without Ph.D. programs that responded to the CSWEP poll, the share was 35 percent in 2017, and has been relatively stable at that level for the past 10 years. Using U.S. Department of Education data on four-year, nonprofit colleges and universities over 2011-2015, Bayer and Wilcox (2017) find that women earned less than a third of the bachelor’s degrees in economics. 2 According to data from the U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), in the academic year 2016-2017, women earned 19.1 percent of the bachelor’s degrees conferred in computer and information sciences, 20.3 percent of the bachelor’s degrees conferred in engineering and engineering technology, 39.7 percent of the bachelor’s degrees conferred in the physical sciences, and 41.8 percent of the bachelor’s degrees conferred in mathematics and statistics. Author’s calculations based on Tables 322.10 and 322.50 in the IPEDS. For trends by field, see Tables 325.35, 325.45, 325.70, and 325.65 in the IPEDS. 3 Women earned 57.3 percent of bachelor’s degrees conferred in the academic year 2016-2017. Author’s calculations based on Tables 322.10 and 322.50 in U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 4 Among schools in the top 100 that offer both business and economics degrees, regardless of gender, students prefer the business degree over economics, but women do so to a greater extent. See Goldin (2013, 2015a ). 3 slightly less than 12 percent of economics degrees awarded, meaning that minorities are choosing economics over other majors at only about half the rate of white students.5 In the professorial ranks, there were large gains in female representation in economics in the 1970s and 1980s, but since then, progress has slowed. Lundberg and Stearns (2019) examined the data available back to the 1970s on the Chairman’s Group of 43 economics departments, which are the highly ranked departments and which granted about two-thirds of U.S. economics Ph.D.s in the 1970s. Gender diversity declines as one moves up the academic ranks, but at these institutions, the female shares rose significantly across the three ranks: the female share of full professors rose from 2 percent in 1972 to 6 percent in 1993. Similarly, over the same period, the female share of associate professors in the Chairman’s Group of institutions rose from 4 percent to 11 percent, and the female share of assistant professors rose from 9 percent to 21 percent. By 2017, the female share of full professors and associate professors had more than doubled, up to more than 13 percent for full professors and 23 percent for associate professors. But at this group of schools, the female share of assistant professors peaked at 29 percent in 2009, and has fallen to 24 percent since then, meaning little net growth for more than two decades. The American Economic Association’s Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) does an annual survey of a broad group of economics departments, with data going back to the 1990s. In 2017, CSWEP surveyed 126 doctoral departments and 125 nondoctoral departments, and received responses back from all the doctoral programs and 113 of the nondoctoral programs.6 At the departments offering Ph.D.s in economics, the assistant professor share has not regressed since 2009 as it 5 Bayer and Wilcox (2017), Table 1. Data are for four-year, not-for-profit colleges and universities in the U.S. for the period 2011-2015. 6 See Lundberg (2018). 4 did in the Chairman’s group of schools, but it has not grown either.7 And in the CSWEP sample, in 2017 about 32 percent of first-year Ph.D. students in economics were women and women accounted for about the same share of those who earned Ph.D.s in economics in 2017. These shares have basically stayed between 30 and 35 percent over the past two decades.8 Our focus today is on women in the profession, but minorities are also under-represented in economics. Analysis of minority representation in graduate economics is complicated a bit by the fact that almost 60 percent of doctorates awarded in economics are awarded to nonpermanent resident students. Some of these graduates return to their own countries, while others stay in the U.S. Restricting attention to U.S. citizens and permanent residents, of the 468 economics doctorates awarded in 2017, only 34, that is, 7 percent, were awarded to under-represented minorities: 15 were earned by African Americans, 18 by Hispanics or Latinos, and 1 by an American Indian or Native Alaskan. 9 This is a lower percentage than earned Ph.D.s across the STEM fields, where under-represented minorities earned 11 percent of the Ph.Ds. in 2017.10 In the academic professorial ranks in economics, under-represented minorities make up a little over 10 percent of assistant professors and about 7 percent of full professors. We can certainly applaud the progress that has been made since the 1970s, but it is clear that there is more work to be done. While you don’t need to have majored in economics to enter a Ph.D. program in economics, it is a natural path. So the under-representation of women and minorities in economics at the undergraduate level factors into the under-representation of these groups at the graduate level and throughout the ranks of academia. Unless the entry of women and minorities into graduate school picks 7 According to the CSWEP survey data, as of 2017, at programs that offer Ph.D.s in economics, 13.9 percent of full professors, 23.0 percent of associate professors, and 28.8 percent of assistant professors in economics were women. The comparable numbers for schools without doctoral programs were higher: 24.1 percent of full professors, 39.3 percent of associate professors, and 43.4 percent of assistant professors in economics were women. See Table 5, Lundberg (2018). 8 See Lundberg (2018). 9 These statistics are from the U.S. Department of Education IPEDS data as reported in Table 1 of the Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession (CSMGEP) (201 8). 10 See Table 2, Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession (CSMGEP) (2018). 5 up, it is hard to see how the numbers of Ph.D.s in the ranks of academia and in nonacademic positions that require a Ph.D. in economics can increase. A natural question to ask is: what fields are women choosing to go into, if not economics? The humanities, including English, foreign languages, and visual arts, and nursing continue to attract women, as they have traditionally done. But women have been selecting other social sciences as well. Data from the National Center for Education Statistics indicate that psychology is a relatively large major, accounting for about 6 percent of all bachelor’s degrees conferred in the 2016-2017 academic year, with about 78 percent earned by women. 11 Business is a large major: almost 20 percent of bachelor’s degrees conferred were in business, with 47 percent of those earned by women. Women have also been selecting the sciences. Biology accounts for about 6 percent of degrees conferred, with about 61 percent earned by women. At the Ph.D. level, the female shares in these fields are also relatively high.12 The fact that women are attracted to other social sciences, some of the natural sciences, and business suggests more progress can and should be made to attract women to economics. Why Does It Matter? You might ask: why should we care? Shouldn’t students be able to choose their field of study and career path? Something that interests them and in which they have a comparative advantage in succeeding? The low level of diversity in economics may just reflect people’s preferences. That’s a possibility, but the fact that the business major is attractive to women may suggest something else. And even if that’s the case, then it is incumbent upon those of us in the field and upon educators to ensure that students can make informed choices and that they understand the value of an economics degree to the individual and to 11 Author’s calculations based on Tables 322.10 and 322.50 in U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 12 Author’s calculations based on Tables 324.10 and 324.35 in U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 6 society. And it is imperative that we offer them the opportunity to perform on a level playing field and eliminate barriers that women and minorities face when pursuing a career in economics. But there is a bigger reason as well. Economics is a field that influences public policy, policy that affects all types of people. So it is important that we have diverse views informing that policy. I believe Fed policymakers like me need to consider the effects of our monetary, regulatory, and payments policies on all our constituents. We are, after all, working on their behalf. That becomes easier to do when we have a diverse staff. The Federal Reserve System employs about 700 Ph.D. economists and many others with bachelor’s and master’s degrees in economics. In order to maintain a diverse staff, it is important that more women and minorities be attracted to the field. Moreover, I have seen firsthand how having a diversity of views expressed and discussed around the table can actually lead to better policy decisions. Sometimes what seems to be a nonmainstream idea when first offered, in time, becomes the leading idea. There is research to back this up. Group dynamics are different when teams are diverse. Participants don’t necessarily find it as comfortable to serve on a diverse team, but the diversity helps to avoid everyone thinking in the same way. Diverse teams tend to be more objective and to focus on the facts when making decisions; they may process information more carefully because they are forced to confront a different way of thinking and convince those with alternative views; and firms with more diversity tend to be more innovative.13 Research also shows that firms with diverse management tend to have above-average earnings.14 Perhaps the better decision- making and innovation associated with diversity is showing up on the bottom line. 13 See Rock and Grant (2016). 14 Rock and Grant (2016) cite a Credit Suisse analysis of 2,400 companies worldwide that found that organizations with at least one female board member had higher return on equity and higher net income growth than firms with no female board members. In addition, Hunt, Layton, and Prince (2015) report on a McKinsey & Company analysis of 366 companies that found that those in the top quartile in terms of management’s ethnic and racial diversity were 35 percent more likely to have financial returns above their industry mean, while those in the top quartile in terms of management’s gender diversity were 15 percent more likely to have financial returns above their industry mean. 7 Beyond current policy and business outcomes, another reason I would like to see more diversity in the field of economics is so the field itself doesn’t get stymied by group-think. To expand our knowledge, economics needs to continually take on new research questions and develop innovative techniques and ways of analysis to arrive at answers to these questions. Broader representation in economics means a broader set of issues will be tackled and a broader set of research results disseminated. The field will continue to evolve, resulting in better policy outcomes that will improve the economic well being of a greater share of the population. What Can Be Done to Increase Diversity in Economics? The natural next question to ask is: what can we do to increase diversity in the field of economics? This is a complex problem, with no easy answers. The good news is that there is an increasing awareness of the diversity problem, some programs have been developed to try to address the issue, and solid research design methods are being applied to evaluate potential interventions. 15 This research can help guide us, but at this stage of the journey toward increased diversity, the approach likely has to be of the “let a thousand flowers bloom” variety: trying many things on several fronts, and then evaluating their effects. So let me conclude my remarks with a few suggestions. (1) Convince those in charge there is a problem and get them involved in finding solutions. I start with the mindset described by the adage: don’t attribute to malice what is best explained by ignorance. We need to convince more of those in charge that there is a problem. I applaud the work that has been done in documenting the trends in diversity in the field of economics. Economics is a data- intensive field. Coupling the data with the research indicating diversity has positive returns should be persuasive to other economists. We cannot just convince the women in the field there’s an issue; we also need to convince the men, who, as the numbers show, are in the majority and therefore have decision rights. This has to be done not only in universities but also at major employers, like the Fed, and at 15 Buckles (2019) discusses some of this research. 8 important institutions like the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). The good news is that this is already happening. The American Economic Association is taking a close look at diversity in the economics profession and is offering programs and resources aimed at increasing diversity at all levels. The Undergraduate Women in Economics (UWE) Challenge, funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and run by Tatyana Avilova and Claudia Goldin, is a randomized controlled trial that is offering grants to economics departments for efforts to increase the number of female majors. The fact that the researchers received such positive interest suggests that many departments see increasing diversity in economics as a worthy goal. 16 Diversity and inclusion have become a focus at the Fed, and also at other major employers of economists like the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Bank of England, and the European Central Bank (ECB). This symposium established by the St. Louis Fed is an example of some of the work being undertaken at the Federal Reserve System. I am happy that the Cleveland Fed will host this symposium next year. Another reason we need to convince more men that this is an issue is that, for the time being, they make up the majority of the role models available for women economics students and for women in the profession. The empirical evidence on role models is somewhat mixed.17 One study of a selective liberal arts college that essentially involved random assignment of students to instructors found that having an instructor of the same gender didn’t increase the probability of a student taking more classes or majoring in the field, regardless of the gender distribution in the department, although it did have some effect on 16 Goldin (2015b) and Avilova and Goldin (2018). 17 Goldin (2013) and Griffith (2013). 9 grading.18 But these results do not suggest that mentoring itself is not helpful. The AEA’s mentoring workshop, CeMENT, held after the annual winter meetings, in which participants present and receive feedback on their research, does seem to have resulted in an increase in overall and top-tier publication rates and grant receipts.19 In addition, we should not be requiring women to do all the mentoring of other women. This places an undue burden of service on them, which may disadvantage female professors as they seek advancement up the professorial ranks. We need to let female students know that the lack of available women does not mean a lack of role models. (2) Increase demand for an economics degree through increasing awareness. A second step is to increase the demand for an economics degree among women and minorities. The financial crisis and Great Recession led many, no doubt, to question the usefulness of the profession, despite the fact that economists created many of the remedies. I believe those in the profession – both male and female – need to do more to explain what economics is and the many ways it can be used to help society. Merriam-Webster defines economics as “a social science concerned chiefly with description and analysis of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.” Who wants to study that? I’d rather be working on robotics and autonomous vehicles, too. Others view economics as a path to working in finance or running a business, but that limited view may put off people who are more motivated to help society. We need to embrace the fact that economics is a social science, one that helps us think about how people use scarce resources, interact in markets or in other economic settings, respond 18 Griffith (2014). The study found that students earned a higher grade in fields dominated by the opposite gender when they had an instructor of the same gender. That is, female students received higher average grades from female instructors when taking courses in fields dominated by men (such as economics) – the difference was on the order of moving from a B-minus to a B. And there was a similar effect for males, who received higher average grades from male instructors when taking courses in female-dominated fields (such as education). A separate study, Carrell, Page, and West (2010), in a different setting found evidence that such grade differentials reflected achievement differentials and not just inflated grading. So the availability of role models appears to positively affect student achievement, but a lack of role models isn’t the whole story about why some students choose not to continue in economics. 19 Buckles (2019) and Blau, et al. (2010). 10 to incentives, and make trade-offs. The fact that economics involves people and their choices makes economics complicated but also impactful to society and an interesting intellectual pursuit. Given the popularity of the psychology major among women, emphasizing the behavioral aspects of economics and its wide application could help to attract women to the field. Indeed, some of the interventions being examined in the UWE Challenge are intended to provide more accurate information on the breadth of application of economics and the career paths available to economics majors. Preliminary results from a field experiment undertaken by Southern Methodist University, a participant in the Challenge, suggest these types of informational interventions can effectively raise the number of women choosing to major in economics.20 Another study found that first- year college students at a Swiss university who were assigned to write a paper on economics were more likely to major in economics, evidence that learning more about the field can attract students to it. However, the effect on choice of major was driven by male students; for females, the effect was not statistically significant. We likely need to start much earlier than college if we hope to attract more women and minorities to the field. I serve on the board of the Council for Economic Education. This nonprofit organization’s mission is to educate students in kindergarten through high school about economics and personal finance so they can make better decisions for themselves, their families, and their communities. In addition to providing materials to teachers, the council runs the National Economics Challenge, a quiz bowl competition that reaches a wide population of students in terms of gender, race, and income. A recent survey found that challenge participants’ performance on advanced placement exams exceeds the national average, with especially strong gains shown by female and minority students, and that participants are more likely than nonparticipants to choose to major in economics.21 This suggests that exposure to economics at a younger age can help spur knowledge of and interest in the field. 20 Avilova and Goldin (2018). 21 Fricke, Grogger, and Steinmayr (2018), as referenced in Buckles (2019). 11 (3) Ensure people have the opportunity to succeed once they choose economics and be cognizant of the fact that some policies have unintended consequences. Economics is a quantitative field. The answer to getting more women to choose economics is not to make it less mathematical. Indeed, the argument that women may be turned off by the quantitative nature of the field is not supported by the evidence. Recall that women earn over 40 percent of bachelor’s degrees in math and statistics, a higher share than in economics. 22 In addition, women do well in math at the high school level; women are selecting other fields that are very quantitative, like psychology; and studies indicate that math aptitude doesn’t explain gender differences in participation in upper-level economics courses. 23 Instead, it is important that students know early on that mathematics, statistics, and econometrics are necessary if they are to pursue an advanced degree. I was always struck by the fact that the undergraduate economics curriculum seems very different from graduate-level economics. That’s likely because economics is taken by many who do not plan to do graduate work in the field. In order to ensure that students don’t learn too late what skills they need to enter graduate school, several universities have interdisciplinary programs combining economics and mathematics so that students have the proper foundation for advancing in the field. The American Economic Association offers a summer training and scholarship program to help prepare students for graduate school and, with the National Science Foundation, a Summer Economics Fellows Program, which is designed to increase the participation and advancement of women and under- represented minorities in economics. The Cleveland Fed held the first workshop for research assistants across the Federal Reserve System to give them a sense of what is required to get into and succeed in graduate school. We will be holding our second workshop this summer. In thinking about ways to spur more diverse participation, it is always good to remember a lesson from 22 Table 325.65, U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 23 See Goldin (2013), and Bayer and Rouse (2016). 12 economics: with any intervention there can be unintended consequences. For example, many universities have enacted policies that allow assistant professors to extend their tenure clocks when they have children. In the interest of fairness, they have made these policies gender neutral. But at least one study finds that the policies increase the probability that men get tenure in their first job but reduce the probability that women get tenure, even when controlling for number of publications.24 This leads me to my last suggestion: the use of “nudges.” (4) Use nudges to change behavior. Behavioral economists use the term “nudge” for something that isn’t mandated but points people in the right direction and can change behavior. 25 We are all born with unconscious biases – we tend to relate better to people who are more like us. This presents a challenge to women and under-represented minorities trying to get ahead in the field, affecting recommendation letters, the probably of getting published, and tenure decisions.26 Making decision-makers aware of these biases has been shown to affect behavior in a positive way; so disseminating the research that shows that women are treated differently in the profession to those in the profession is useful. It is the responsibility of the junior people in the economics profession to do the best work they can, which means learning all they can, seeking out opportunities to present their own research, and asking for advice. It is the responsibility of the senior people in the profession to cultivate an inclusive environment so that all have the opportunity to reach their potential. Some people feel that the atmosphere in economic seminars is too aggressive; others feel it helps generate better research. Rather than change the seminar culture, we should do what we can to make women feel comfortable in that setting. After all, critique is part of research, and to be successful at publishing your work, one has to get used to it and persevere. As I learned in my German course, “Übung macht den Meister,” that is, “Practice makes 24 See Antecol, Bedard, and Stearns (2018) and Lundberg and Stearns (2019). 25 See Thaler (2017, 2018) and Sunstein (2014). 26 See Lundberg and Stearns (2019) for a summary of some of the research. 13 perfect.” Practice seminars and study groups can help people become more comfortable sharing ideas and questioning others. Senior members of the profession can help ensure that their study groups are more inclusive and they can draw out those reluctant to speak up. And in a meeting, when Sheila offers an idea that is totally ignored until Bruce repeats it and is declared a genius, point out to the group that Sheila made the same point earlier and ask her to elaborate. If you find yourself putting together a program committee to select papers for a conference, or organizing the conference or a seminar series, work hard to ensure there is diversity on the committee, on the program, and in the seminar series. This does take some effort, but it can be done. If you are sponsoring a conference or seminar series, make diversity a top priority. Finally, you may have noticed the title of my talk and thought: “Perspectives of a brown-eyed economist? That’s silly!” You’re right. But how many would have thought that if I had titled this “Perspectives of a woman economist?” That seems more natural – but it shouldn’t. No one really wants to be known as a woman economist, or a woman chef, or a woman banker. We don’t want to be qualified by our gender. We are economists, chefs, and bankers who just happen to be women. It is difficult to change institutions and cultures. But I am confident that with concerted efforts from both men and women, economics will become more diversified and inclusive, which will strengthen economic research and policymaking and, in turn, help promote a healthier economy for a wider group of people. I look forward to the time when the top women in the field are not considered top women economists, but instead are viewed as unqualified successes. References Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns, “Equal but Inequitable: Who Benefits from Gender- Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies?” American Economic Review 108 (2018), pp. 2420-2441. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20160613) Avilova, Tatyana, and Claudia Goldin, “What Can UWE Do for Economics?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24189, January 2018. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w24189.pdf) 14 Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse, “Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (Fall 2016), pp. 221-242. (https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.4.221) Bayer, Amanda, and David Wilcox, “The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at US Colleges and Universities,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2017105pap.pdf) Blau, Francine D., Janet M. Currie, Rachel T. A. Croson, and Donna K. Ginther, “Can Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors? Interim Results from a Randomized Trial,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 100 (May 2010), pp. 348-352. (http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.100.2.348) Buckles, Kasey, “Fixing the Leaky Pipeline: Strategies for Making Economics Work for Women at Every Stage,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (Winter 2019), pp. 43-60. (https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.1.43) Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West, “Sex and Science: How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2010), pp. 1101-1144. (https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2010.125.3.1101) Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession, Annual Report, American Economic Association, December 2018. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=9030) Fricke, Hans, Jeffery Grogger, and Andreas Steinmayr, “Exposure to Academic Fields and College Major Choice,” Economics of Education Review 64 (2018), pp. 199-213. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2018.04.007) Goldin, Claudia, “Notes on Women and the Economics Undergraduate Major,” Newsletter of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) (Summer 2013), pp. 4-6, 15. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=570) Goldin, Claudia, “Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major: Notes on the Undergraduate Economics Major at a Highly Selective Liberal Arts College,” manuscript, April 12, 2015a (update of Goldin, Summer 2013). Goldin, Claudia, “Change Starts with UWE: Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major,” December 13, 2015b (presented at the American Economic Association annual meeting, January 4, 2016). Griffith, Amanda L., “The Importance of Role Models,” Newsletter of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) (Summer 2013), pp. 9-10, 16. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=570) Griffith, Amanda L., “Faculty Gender in the College Classroom: Does It Matter for Achievement and Major Choice?” Southern Economic Journal 81 (2014), pp. 211-231. (https://doi.org/10.4284/0038-4038-2012.100) Hunt, Vivian, Dennis Layton, and Sara Prince, “Why Diversity Matters,” McKinsey & Company, January 2015. (https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters) 15 Lundberg, Shelly, “The 2017 Annual Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession,” American Economic Association, 2018. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=6388) Lundberg, Shelly and Jenna Stearns, “Women in Economics: Stalled Progress,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (Winter 2019), pp. 3-22. (https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.1.3) Rock, David, and Heidi Grant, “Why Diverse Teams Are Smarter,” Harvard Business Review, November 4, 2016. (https://hbr.org/2016/11/why-diverse-teams-are-smarter) Sunstein, Cass R., “Nudging: A Very Short Guide,” Journal of Consumer Policy 37 (2014), pp. 583-588. (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10603-014-9273-1) Thaler, Richard H., “From Cashews to Nudges: The Evolution of Behavioral Economics,” Nobel Prize Lecture slides, December 8, 2017. (https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/thaler-lecture-slides.pdf) Thaler, Richard H., “From Cashews to Nudges: The Evolution of Behavioral Economics,” American Economic Review, 108 (2018), pp. 1265-1287. (https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/aer.108.6.1265) U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), Digest of Education Statistics: List of 2018 Digest Tables (2018). (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2018menu_tables.asp)
