Financial Stability: The Role of Real Estate Values By Eric S. Rosengren March 22, 2017 (Indonesia time) March 22, 2017 Bali, Indonesia Bank Supervision Forum Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank Indonesia, and the Financial Stability Institute Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Real estate has played an important role in past periods of financial instability, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said today at a conference on banking supervision. Because many financial intermediaries lend to households and businesses with real estate as the collateral, recessions that are accompanied by significant declines in real estate valuations can lead to broader problems, Rosengren said. "In the United States the two most significant recent periods of financial instability were accompanied by declines in real estate values that impacted financial institutions and intensified the business cycle." Rosengren stressed that he was not predicting problems, but rather suggesting continued work to head them off. He noted improvements since the financial crisis that have left financial institutions with better capitalization and liquidity, and resolution plans. But he cautioned against overconfidence. Noting that real estate holdings are widespread, and that the tools for handling valuation concerns are somewhat limited, Rosengren believes we must acknowledge that the commercial real estate sector "has the potential to amplify whatever problems may emerge when we at some point face an economic downturn." "When large losses have occurred because of declines in real estate values, banks have historically shrunk their lending," and "such a tightening of lending has several compounding effects." "I am not expecting such problems in the near term," he stressed, "but would say that awareness, informed by data and analysis, is a first important step to continued actions that can head off unwelcome problems in the future." Rosengren noted that commercial real estate capitalization rates are very low by historical standards, meaning that price increases have been outpacing growth in net operating income. "This is occurring despite the gradual tightening of short-term interest rates and the issuance of real estate guidance by bank regulators." Rosengren also said that more-recent growth in lending has been quite significant. "Over the past year, holdings of commercial mortgages by the banking sector have increased 8.9 percent, while bank holdings of multifamily mortgages have increased 12.0 percent," he said. "This growth has occurred while bank supervisors have been cautioning about the potential risks emanating from the high valuations in some sectors of the real estate market." Rosengren was speaking at the Asia-Pacific High Level Meeting on Banking Supervision in Bali, Indonesia; organized by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Institute, and the Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks Working Group on Banking Supervision; and hosted by Bank Indonesia. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

The Case for Gradual but Regular Monetary Policy Normalization By Eric S. Rosengren March 29, 2017 Boston, MA Boston Economic Club Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Speaking in Boston on Wednesday, Eric Rosengren said recent economic reports have been consistent with "continued steady improvement in the economy." Rosengren, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, cited growth in payroll employment and earnings, and the unemployment rate declining to his estimate of full employment. In Rosengren's view, it was "entirely appropriate" to raise the federal funds rate target in March. And "looking ahead over the course of this year, I believe it is likely to be appropriate for the FOMC to raise rates at a more regular – though still gradual – pace." "My own view is that an increase at every other FOMC meeting over the course of this year could and should be the committee's default, unless economic data come in inconsistent with forecasts," Rosengren said. "This would still be a fully data-dependent approach, not a preset path, as it would hinge on the incoming data – but the base case would be four tightenings, reflecting the strength of the economy that I believe justifies more regular normalization of interest rates." He called this approach fully consistent with a "gradual" path. Even as the economy approaches the Fed's dual mandate goals, Rosengren said the nominal rate is still low and inflation is approaching 2 percent, resulting in a real rate below zero. "While it is not unusual to have negative real interest rates when the economy is quite weak, it is unusual to still have negative real interest rates late in a recovery when the economy is close to full employment and nearing the inflation target." He described several reasons why the federal funds rate has remained so low in this cycle. But he also noted the potential costs of an unemployment rate that is below the sustainable rate. Rosengren showed that 28 states are at least one percentage point below their 20-year average unemployment rate. "A potentially overheating economy may be reflected in movements in the overall price level, in asset prices, or both," said Rosengren, while referencing various indicators. And he stressed the core motivation for his cautions: "It is important to avoid creating an over-hot economy that could require a more rapid tightening of monetary policy – which would place at risk the economic improvements seen to date." In that spirit he recommends a "gradual but more regular move to normalization." Rosengren was speaking to the Boston Economic Club and Boston Fed staff, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords monetary policy

The Federal Reserve Balance Sheet and Monetary Policy By Eric S. Rosengren April 19,2017 Annandale-On-Hudson, NY Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference. Levy Economics Institute at Bard College's Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (MP3) more share share share share On Wednesday, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said that structural changes in the macroeconomy "may necessitate more frequent use of large-scale asset purchases during recessions." He called it "quite likely" that the use of central bank balance sheets will be necessary in future economic downturns. The reason? A combination of low inflation, low rates of productivity growth, and slow population growth may imply an economy "where equilibrium short-term interest rates remain relatively low" by historical standards. As a result, reductions in short-term rates to combat recessions will encounter the zero boundary and "will not be sufficient," Rosengren said – so "it is likely to be more common for central banks to engage in asset purchases to stimulate the economy by reducing longer-term rates." "So balance-sheet expansions – and exits – are likely to become more standard monetary policy tools around the world." Still, Rosengren noted that the Federal Reserve should adopt balance sheet exit strategies "that reinforce the primacy of interest rate policy." Rosengren said that while the FOMC is still carefully considering its balance sheet exit strategy, his ideal policy "would take a very gradual approach to balance sheet reduction." "In my view that process could begin relatively soon, and should not significantly alter the FOMC's continuing gradual normalization of short-term interest rates," he said. Rosengren added that by initially retiring only a small percentage of maturing securities, and then very gradually shrinking the volume of the securities being reinvested, "the tightening of short-term interest rates should not need to be much different than it would be in the absence of shrinking the balance sheet." "Starting to shrink the balance sheet earlier – and doing so in a very gradual fashion – implies very little reduction in the degree of monetary stimulus coming from the U.S. central bank's balance sheet," Rosengren said. "This, in turn, will allow policymakers to focus on gradual increases in the federal funds rate target as the primary mechanism for normalizing monetary policy and calibrating the economy." Rosengren was speaking at the Levy Economics Institute at Bard College's 26th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (MP3)

Trends in Commercial Real Estate By Eric S. Rosengren May 9, 2017 New York, NY Center for Real Estate Finance Research at NYU Stern Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Speaking in New York on Tuesday, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren discussed commercial real estate valuations. While a variety of favorable conditions account for some of the elevated valuations, he noted that at such times it is worth asking what could go wrong and cause a reversal. "While I do not expect that a downturn in commercial real estate prices would by itself cause a significant problem for the economy, in some past recessions such an occurrence has propagated an initial adverse shock – and by constraining financial intermediaries, made the extent of the subsequent economic downturn more severe for a wide range of households and businesses that depend on intermediaries for credit," Rosengren said, echoing themes he has stressed in prior analysis. Rosengren said the regulatory community must also remain attuned to developments, understand how a reversal may propagate through the financial system, and consider whether the system is resilient enough to withstand such shocks, should they occur. He acknowledged a number of favorable "tailwinds" accompanying rising commercial real estate valuations, including low and stable inflation, accommodative monetary policy, and the relative economic strength in the U.S. compared with the rest of the world. Rosengren also said that greater urbanization, later marriage age, and preferences among the large cohort of millennials are additional favorable trends for multifamily commercial real estate. However, Rosengren cautioned that it is harder to know if these conditions warrant the extent of price increase we have seen to date. "For almost any asset category, positive trends can sometimes evolve into prices that increase more than fundamentals justify," Rosengren said. "It is very hard to distinguish how much of the price gain is the result of the favorable fundamentals, and how much reflects an abundance of optimism by investors." Rosengren noted that government‐sponsored enterprises (or "GSEs") have significant holdings or guarantees of multifamily loans outstanding. If future reform proposals required the GSEs to reduce their holdings of multifamily loans "a potential and significant shock to this sector of the commercial real estate market could occur." Rosengren concluded by noting that leveraged institutions and GSEs have significant exposures to commercial real estate. In the event of an adverse scenario such as a recession, these exposures could pose significant risks to these institutions. "While I am certainly not expecting such a scenario to occur, central bankers are charged with thinking about adverse risks to the economy. So current valuations in real estate are one such risk that I will continue to watch carefully," Rosengren said. Rosengren was speaking at the Risk Management for Commercial Real Estate Financial Markets Conference at New York University's Stern School of Business. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Exploring the Economy’s Recent Progress, and the Implications for Policy By Eric S. Rosengren May 10, 2017 South Burlington, VT Lake Champlain Regional Chamber of Commerce and the Central Vermont Chamber of Commerce Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Speaking in Vermont, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said he expects the economy to remain on solid footing, and said conditions justify continuing a gradual increase in the federal funds rate and also beginning to reduce gradually the assets on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. "As long as the balance sheet reduction is not steep, it should have only modest effects on credit markets – in other words it can be gradually reduced 'in the background,'" Rosengren said. "That will allow Fed policymakers to focus primarily on gradual normalization of the federal funds rate, using it as the primary vehicle for attaining sustainable growth, full employment, and price stability at 2 percent inflation." Calling weaker-than-expected first quarter economic data "probably a temporary lull," Rosengren noted the strength of the April labor market report, GDP growth likely to exceed 2 percent for the remainder of the year, and measures of inflation near the Fed's 2 percent target. Rosengren said in his view it is important that the Federal Reserve continue to gradually normalize interest rates, and also to begin to normalize the central bank's balance sheet. Echoing previous concerns about creating an "over-hot economy," Rosengren said most forecasters are expecting growth above potential, and unemployment rates below his estimate of full employment. This, he said, would represent an unsustainable, "overshooting" pace for the economy – and provides an important rationale for continuing the process of normalization of monetary policy that is currently underway. "My primary message today is about the importance of achieving positive, but long‐run sustainable, economic conditions – full employment and stable prices – and, by extension, that monetary policy supports such an outcome." Rosengren acknowledged potential risks to the forecast – including around bank lending and risks from abroad. But, while bank loan growth has not been as robust as in previous cycles, this likely reflects the nature of the crisis, recession, and recovery rather than a particular weakness in underlying economic conditions. And the risk of a slowdown from abroad seems to be abating as of late. Exploring the stance of policy, Rosengren said U.S. monetary policy remains "quite accommodative," while economic conditions are now consistent with full employment and the Fed's inflation target. Noting that the median forecast among Fed policymakers is for two more increases for this year, Rosengren said his own view "remains that along with a gradual reduction in the level of the balance sheet, it would still be reasonable to have three rate increases over the remainder of this year, assuming the economy evolves like my forecast envisions." Rosengren was speaking to the Lake Champlain Regional Chamber of Commerce and the Central Vermont Chamber of Commerce, in South Burlington, Vermont. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)
