Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Riksbank Macroprudential Conference, Stockholm, Sweden Share It's a pleasure to take part in the Riksbank Macroprudential Conference and I thank the organizers for inviting me to participate in the conference, and particularly in this panel on stress testing. Stress testing has become a cornerstone of a new approach to regulation and supervision of the largest financial institutions in the United States. The Federal Reserve's first supervisory stress test was the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, known as the SCAP. Conducted in 2009 during the depths of the financial crisis, the SCAP marked the first time the U.S. bank regulatory agencies had conducted a supervisory stress test simultaneously across the largest banking firms. The results clearly demonstrated the value of simultaneous, forward-looking supervisory assessments of capital adequacy under stressed conditions. The SCAP was also a key contributor to the relatively rapid restoration of the financial health of the U.S. banking system. The Fed's approach to stress testing of the largest and most systemic financial institutions has evolved since the SCAP, but several key elements persist to this day. 1 These elements include, first, supervisory stress scenarios applicable to all firms; second, defined consequences for firms deemed to be insufficiently capitalized; and third, public disclosure of the results. The Fed has subsequently conducted five stress test exercises that built on the success of SCAP, while making some important improvements to the stress test processes. The first key innovation was the development of supervisory models and processes that allow the Fed to evaluate independently whether banks are sufficiently resilient to continue to lend to consumers and to businesses under adverse economic and financial conditions. This innovation took place over the course of several exercises and was made possible by the extensive collection of data from the banks. These data have allowed supervisors to build models that are more sensitive to stress scenarios and better define the riskiness of the firms' different businesses and exposures. The second innovation since the SCAP was the use of the supervisory stress test as a key input into the annual supervisory evaluation of capital adequacy at the largest bank holding companies. The crisis demonstrated the importance of forward-looking supervision that accounted for the possibility of negative outcomes. By focusing on forward-looking post-stress capital ratios, stress testing provides an assessment of a firm's capital adequacy that is complementary to regulatory capital ratios, which reflect the firm's performance to date. Although we view this new approach to capital assessment as a significant improvement over previous practices, we are aware that the true test of this new regime will come only if another period of significant financial or economic stress were to materialize--which is to say that we will not have a strong test of the effectiveness of stress testing until the stress tests undergo a real world stress test. The same comment, mutatis mutandis , applies to the overall changes in methods of bank regulation and supervision made since September 15, 2008. Third, supervisory stress testing has been on the leading edge of a movement toward greater supervisory transparency. Since the SCAP, the Fed has steadily increased the transparency around its stress testing processes, methodologies, and results. Before the crisis, releasing unfavorable supervisory information about particular firms was unthinkable--for fear of setting off runs on banks. However, the release of the SCAP results helped to calm markets during the crisis by reducing uncertainty about firm solvency. Indeed, only one of the 10 firms deemed to have a capital shortfall was unable to close the identified gap on the private markets. Our experience to date has been that transparency around the stress testing exercise improves the credibility of the exercise and creates accountability both for firms and supervisors. That said, too much transparency can also have potentially negative consequences, an idea to which I will turn shortly. With the benefit of five years of experience, the Fed is continuing to assess its stress testing program, and to make appropriate changes. Examples of such changes to date include the assumption of default by each firm's largest counterparty and the assumption that firms would not curtail lending to consumers and businesses, even under severely adverse conditions. As part of that assessment process, we are also currently seeking feedback from the industry, market analysts, and academics about the program. Supervisory stress testing is not a static exercise and must adapt to a changing economic and financial environment and must incorporate innovations in modeling technology. Work is currently underway on adapting the stress testing framework to accommodate firms that have not traditionally been subject to these tests. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the Fed to conduct stress tests on non-bank financial institutions that have been designated as systemically important by the FSOC--the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Three of the currently designated financial institutions are global insurance companies. While distress at these firms poses risks to financial stability, particularly during a stressful period, certain sources of risk to these firms are distinct from the risks banking organizations face. A key aspect of this ongoing work includes adapting our current stress testing framework and scenarios to ensure that the tests for non-bank SIFIs--systemically important financial institutions--are appropriate. Another area where work continues--and will likely always continue--is the Fed's ongoing research aimed at improving our ability to estimate losses and revenues under stress. Supervisors have both to develop new approaches that push the state of the art in stress testing and to respond as new modeling techniques are developed or as firm activities and risk concentrations evolve over time. For example, forecasting how a particular bank's revenue may respond to a severe macroeconomic recession can be challenging, and we continue to seek ways to enhance our ability to do so. Supervisory stress testing models and methodologies have to evolve over time in order to better capture salient emerging risks to financial firms and the system as a whole. However, the framework cannot simply be expanded to include more and more aspects of reality. For example, incorporating feedback from financial system distress to the real economy is a complex and difficult modelling challenge. Whether we recognize it or not, the standard solution to a complex modeling challenge is to simplify--typically to the minimum extent possible--aspects of the overall modelling framework. However, incorporating feedback into the stress test framework may require simplifying aspects of the framework to a point where it is less able to capture the risks to individual institutions. Even so, one can imagine substantial gains from continued research on stress testing's role in macroprudential supervision and our understanding of risks to the financial system, such as knock-on effects, contagion, fire sales, and the interaction between capital and liquidity during a crisis. Finally, let me close by addressing a question that often arises about the use of a supervisory stress test, such as those conducted by the Fed, with common scenarios and models. Such a test may create the possibility of, in former Chairman Bernanke's words, a "model monoculture," in which all models are similar and all miss the same key risks. 2 Such a culture could possibly create vulnerabilities in the financial system. At the Fed we try to address this issue, in part, through appropriate disclosure about the supervisory stress test. We have published information about the overall framework employed in various aspects of the supervisory stress test, but not the full details that banks could use to manage to the test. This--making it easier to game the test--is the potential negative consequence of transparency that I alluded to earlier. We also value different approaches for designing scenarios and conducting stress tests. In the United States, in addition to supervisory stress testing, large financial firms are required to conduct their own stress tests, using their own models and stress scenarios that capture their unique risks. 3 In evaluating each bank's capital planning process, supervisors focus on how well banks' internal scenarios and models capture their unique risks and business models. We expect firms to determine the risks inherent to their businesses, their risk-appetite, and to make business decisions on that basis. And that is a good place to stop. Thank you. 1. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the Fed to conduct a supervisory stress test for bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets, and for nonbank financial companies designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for Fed supervision. Return to text 2. Ben S. Bernanke (2013), " Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned? " speech delivered at the "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail" financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, April 8. Return to text 3. Under the Dodd-Frank Act, all financial companies with more than $10 billion in total consolidated assets that are supervised by a primary federal financial regulatory agency are required to conduct an annual company-run stress test. However, only bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets are subject to the supervisory stress test and an evaluation of their capital planning process. Return to text Last Update: June 24, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Crockett Governors' Roundtable 2015 for African Central Bankers, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom Share I would like to thank the organizers of the conference for inviting me to this event. 1 I have been invited in the past and had very much wanted to take part--especially in light of my having been born in Zambia and having received my schooling in Zambia, South Africa, and Zimbabwe--but somehow it never worked out. I am therefore especially delighted finally to be here. In my talk today, I will focus on both the challenges facing the Federal Reserve and those facing central banks of developing countries in our increasingly interconnected world. But let me begin my remarks with a very brief digression on the history of central banking to put recent developments in context. Historical Context Today the great majority of countries have a central bank or an institution that fulfills the functions of a central bank. But this was not always the case in the past. Even after the advanced economies began to set up central banks, it was not widely accepted that smaller nations needed one. Although the first central bank, the Swedish Riksbank, dates back to 1668, it was only in 1920 that the case for setting up a central bank in almost all countries was recognized among official circles in a resolution of the League of Nations' conference in Brussels that year, which stipulated, among other things, that "in countries where there is no central bank of issue, one should be established." 2 At the time, the main concern of the participants in the conference was the preservation of the international monetary order, by which was meant the possibility for both the private and public sectors of all countries to engage in domestic and international transactions. Since then, as it has become increasingly apparent that central banks can fulfill many functions, the number of central banks has expanded from 23 in 1920 to over 160 currently. And not only are there more central banks, but also the functions of central banks have continued to evolve. Until the Great Financial Crisis, both the practice and the theory of modern central banking revolved around the inflationary tendencies inherent in the conflict between the short- and long-run effects of monetary expansion and in the temptations of monetary financing of government spending. 3 Taking into account the fact that many leading central banks have recently had to deal with below-target inflation, one would have to amend the previous sentence to say that the practice and the theory of modern central banking revolve around the benefits of keeping monetary policy independent of short-term political considerations--with respect to both the stabilization of the price level and the temptations of monetary financing of the budget. The earliest central banks provided financing for governments and helped develop the financial system, often by bringing order to the note issue. As the practice of central banking developed during the 19th century, central banks took on the primary responsibility for protecting the stability of the financial system and the external value of the currency. The mandate given to central banks in legislation passed in the 1930s and 1940s typically included both monetary stability and the promotion of full employment and maximum output--and frequently other goals as well. As the inflationary forces that eventually led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system gathered strength in the 1960s and 1970s, the focus of monetary policy shifted to the maintenance of the domestic value of the currency. In the decades that followed, central banks began to place greater emphasis on the stabilization of inflation, and that trend has continued to date. 4 Although this shift in emphasis originated in the advanced economies, emerging market and developing economies eventually followed suit, with many of them bringing down high rates of inflation and formally adopting an inflation targeting policy framework. Even in countries without formal inflation targeting frameworks, stabilization of inflation remains an important objective, sometimes alongside other important objectives such as stabilization of the external value of the currency, stabilization of the macroeconomy, financial stability, and the development of the monetary and financial systems. The U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy In the United States, the Federal Reserve has, since 1977, been operating under a dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability. 5 Our main challenge, since the global financial crisis, has been to make rapid (or at least as rapid as possible) progress toward achieving these objectives. While it has taken a long time, and extraordinary monetary policy actions, the U.S. economy is now close to full employment, with core inflation, at 1.2 percent, below our 2 percent inflation target, but, in the view of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), likely to reach 2 percent within about two years. Let me provide an update on recent progress toward the attainment of these goals and its effects on the current stance of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy. U.S. economic activity and inflation The U.S. economy slowed sharply in the first quarter of this year, with the most recent estimate being that real GDP declined 0.2 percent at an annual rate. Household spending slowed, while both business investment and net exports declined. Much of this slowdown seemed to reflect transitory factors, including harsh winter weather, labor disputes at West Coast ports, and probably statistical noise. Confirming that view, the latest monthly data on real consumption provide welcome evidence that consumer demand is rebounding, and that economic activity likely expanded at an annual rate of about 2.5 percent in the second quarter. In addition, U.S. labor markets have continued to improve. For the first five months of this year, payroll job gains have averaged 217,000 per month. These gains are lower than those seen late last year but are still substantial, and they are above the rate needed to maintain the rate of unemployment at a constant rate of labor force participation. The unemployment rate has moved lower this year and registered 5.5 percent in May. Both long-term unemployment and involuntary part-time employment declined as well. While these developments represents considerable progress toward strengthening of the labor market, some room remains for further improvement. There are grounds for optimism that economic growth will be sufficient to promote further gains in labor market conditions. Consumer spending should be helped by the earlier declines in oil prices because the boost to household incomes from the drop in oil prices is substantial. Lower gasoline prices alone are estimated to be saving the typical household about $700 this year, thus providing households with the resources potentially to increase spending on other goods and services. Moreover, consumer sentiment remains solid. To be sure, with the U.S. now a major oil producer, lower oil prices have also had some negative effects on the U.S. economy. Domestic oil drilling dropped sharply over the past few months, and sectors that support this activity have seen adverse effects. But, on net, the United States should gain from the fall in oil prices, given that we are still a sizable importer of oil. On the negative side, the substantial appreciation of the dollar since last summer has been a significant headwind to the U.S. economy. The weakness in industrial activity recently has been more pronounced in sectors that are highly exposed to international trade. The first-quarter drop in net exports was very large, not only because of the appreciation of the dollar, but also in part reflecting--as mentioned above--port disruptions and possibly also some statistical noise. Our analysis of the determinants of U.S. trade suggests that the recent appreciation of the dollar will restrain economic growth to some extent for a time even after these transitory factors have dissipated. Evaluating all of the indicators, the FOMC expects--as outlined in its June 17 statement--that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels consistent with the dual mandate. Turning to price stability, the other goal of our dual mandate, we have seen little progress toward inflation moving back to our target of 2 percent. The 12‑month change in headline personal consumption expenditures prices is now close to zero--though that very low level of inflation is temporary, in large part reflecting the large declines in energy prices around the turn of 2015. The stronger dollar is also weighing on U.S. inflation by reducing the prices we pay for our imported goods and services. Core inflation is running at 1-1/4 percent and will likely remain lower than we would like in the months ahead as the exchange rate effects pass through. Over the medium term, the FOMC expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent as the labor market tightens and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices wane; indeed, energy prices appear to have stabilized. U.S. monetary policy Based on our reading of economic conditions, the FOMC decided at its June 17 meeting to leave the federal funds rate target range at 0 to 1/4 percent. Importantly, our June statement included no time-based guidance about the timing of liftoff of the policy rate from zero, emphasizing, instead, conditions that need to be satisfied before the federal funds rate target range is adjusted. The Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Of course, because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, we should not wait until we have reached our objectives to begin adjusting policy. It goes without saying that we are also mindful of the risks of tightening policy prematurely. We anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when we have seen further improvement in the labor market and are reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. Thus, our policy will be data dependent, and the FOMC at upcoming meetings will weigh possible adjustments to the level of the target federal funds rate, based on its assessment of incoming data and the economic outlook. Regarding inflation, an important factor working to increase confidence in the inflation outlook will be continued improvement in the labor market. Theoretical and empirical evidence suggests that inflation will eventually begin to rise as resource utilization tightens. And while the link between wages and inflation can be tenuous, it is encouraging that we are seeing tentative indications of an acceleration in labor compensation. Once we begin to remove policy accommodation, the Committee's assessment is that economic conditions will likely warrant raising the federal funds rate only gradually. Thus, we expect that the target federal funds rate will remain for some time below levels viewed as normal in the longer run. But that is only a forecast, and monetary policy will, in practice, be determined by the data--primarily data on inflation and unemployment. What about financial stability? We are aware of the possibility that low interest rates maintained for a prolonged period could prompt an excessive buildup in leverage or cause underwriting standards to erode as investors take on risks they cannot measure or manage appropriately in a reach for yield. At this point, the evidence does not indicate that such vulnerabilities pose a significant threat, but we are carefully monitoring developments in this area. U.S. Monetary Policy Spillovers and Global Interest Rates As we consider the decision of policy rate normalization, we are mindful of possible spillovers to other economies, including emerging market and developing economies. In an interconnected world, fulfilling the Federal Reserve's objectives under its dual mandate requires that we pay close attention to how our own actions affect other countries and how developments abroad, in turn, spill back into U.S. economic conditions. In order to minimize the likelihood of surprises and thus avoid creating unnecessary market and policy volatility, we are striving to communicate our policy strategy clearly and transparently. Beyond communicating our intentions, we also emphasize that monetary policy normalization in the United States will occur in the context of a strengthening U.S. economy, which should benefit the emerging market and developing economies. Still, one feature of the era after the first increase of the federal funds rate will, in all likelihood, be higher U.S. and global interest rates compared with their extraordinarily low levels of recent years. The increase in global interest rates could cause investors to adjust their portfolios, triggering capital outflows from emerging market and developing economies. The financing needs of emerging market and developing countries remain substantial. As tomorrow's session on the outlook for Africa's debt capital markets will discuss, many African countries were able to issue bonds on the international financial markets in recent years--in some cases, for the first time in history. This development is due to the significant economic progress of the continent of the past several years and to commodity booms, ample global liquidity, and low interest rates. Higher global interest rates could limit the possibilities for governments to finance their projects or budgets on the same favorable terms. The reduced ability of governments to finance their needs will likely increase the challenges faced by central banks in their efforts to assist the economic growth and development agendas of their national governments. Emerging market and developing economies have generally done a good job of reducing their financial and economic vulnerabilities over the past couple of decades. For example, since the 1990s, many of them have made remarkable progress in reducing inflation, improving government debt ratios, building foreign reserves, and better regulating and capitalizing their banking systems. These improved economic fundamentals should bolster their resilience should normalization of monetary policy in the United States and some other advanced economies lead to financial market stresses. Even so, policymakers will be better positioned to cope with shocks, both internal and external, if they continue to strengthen these economic fundamentals. Monetary Policy in Developing Countries As mentioned earlier, the Federal Reserve has operated under a dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment, which has worked well for the U.S. economy. When it comes to central banking more generally, I doubt that there is any particular monetary policy framework that is suitable for all countries for all times. The central bank's choice of monetary policy framework should depend on the objectives it aims to achieve, on the challenges that the economy faces, and on the structure of the financial markets and the economy in which it operates. And it is likely that the monetary policy framework will change over time as the domestic economy and the international financial system develop. The exchange rate regime is a key consideration. In recent decades, developing economies have experienced increasing capital mobility and financial integration into the global economy. Over the longer term, this is a welcome development that will help meet the substantial financing needs of the private and public sectors, but greater financial integration and financial flows also complicate monetary policy in an environment in which exchange rate considerations are important--and they are generally very important. These are small open economies in which external shocks are often large, and the excessive volatility inherent in free-floating exchange rates can be costly. As a consequence, many developing and emerging market countries both intervene in the foreign exchange markets and impose restrictions on capital inflows and outflows. Why not simply peg the exchange rate? According to the impossible triad, or the more sophisticated version developed by Hélène Rey, the impossible duo, a pegged rate, combined with capital mobility, makes it difficult for monetary policy to be used independently to achieve macroeconomic stabilization and price stability. 6 Nonetheless, some economies have successfully implemented pegged exchange rates. Hong Kong and Francophone Africa are leading examples. Properly managed, some flexibility of exchange rates can help economies absorb external shocks, including swings in prices of commodities to which these economies are still heavily exposed. Accordingly, there has been a shift toward flexible, but managed, exchange rate systems among emerging market and developing economies. However, none of us should underestimate the difficulties of managing the exchange rate and of developing knowledge about when and how much to allow the exchange rate to move in response to domestic and external economic shocks. Even beyond the management of the exchange rate, central banks in developing countries face difficult challenges in developing their monetary policy frameworks. For many years, the standard International Monetary Fund approach to monetary policy--which embodied the monetary approach to the balance of payments--emphasized money targets. But this approach has become less tenable as economies have evolved and matured. As you know, the effectiveness of such a framework depends, among other things, on the stability of the money demand function and on the structural relationship between monetary aggregates and macroeconomic variables. These relationships tend to shift as the financial system develops, making money targeting frameworks less effective--as we know from the historical experience of monetary policies in advanced economies. For this reason, advanced economies abandoned them, and some emerging market economies followed suit, generally, in favor of inflation targeting frameworks, with short-term interest rates as the main instruments and the use of open market operations to control the liquidity in the economy. However the conditions necessary for full-blown inflation targeting achieved through adjustment of policy interest rates may not be present in some of these economies. In the advanced economies and some emerging market economies, financial systems are relatively well developed, deep, and diversified, which facilitates the conduct of monetary policy through open market operations. In many of the developing countries, however, although financial systems are developing rapidly, they remain small and not well diversified, hindering the ability of central banks to conduct open market operations. Indeed, in many countries, interbank markets are still underdeveloped, and, even though some central banks use policy rates, changes to these policy rates have only limited effect on other interest rates and on the economy more generally. Thus, the ambitions of developing countries to modernize their monetary policy frameworks have to proceed in parallel with further efforts to develop the market institutions necessary to conduct monetary policy in a conventional way. 7 Concluding Remarks Central banking as a profession has come a long way, striving to adapt itself to the challenges faced by economies over time, and both the practice and theory of central banking will continue to evolve. Like others, central banks in developing countries are making strides in modernizing their policy frameworks and better adapting them to the problems that their economies face. Nonetheless, significant challenges remain to develop financial systems and accelerate financial inclusion, to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, and to further expand the institutional and operational capacities of central banks. I wish you--the governors and high officials of African central banks--well in carrying out your critical and difficult responsibilities, and I look forward to discussing with you the policy issues that you confront. References Berg, Andrew, Stephen O'Connell, Catherine Pattilllo, Rafael Portillo, Filiz Unsal (forthcoming). "Monetary Policy Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa," in Célestin Monga and Justin Yifu Lin, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Africa and Economics: Policies and Practices. New York: Oxford University Press. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, June 17. Capie, Forrest, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt (1994). The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. International Monetary Fund (2004). " Monetary Policy Implementation at Different Stages of Market Development ." Washington: IMF, October. -------- (2014). " Conditionality in Evolving Monetary Policy Regimes (PDF) ." Washington: IMF, March. Laurens, Bernard J., Kelly Eckhold, Darryl King, Nils Maehle, Abdul Naseer, and Alain Durré (2015). " The Journey to Inflation Targeting: Easier Said than Done--The Case for Transitional Monetary Arrangements along the Road ," IMF Working Paper WP/15/136. Washington: IMF, June. League of Nations (1920). Report of the International Financial Conference . Brussels: League of Nations, October. Rey, Hélène (2015). "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence," NBER Working Paper Series 21162. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. See League of Nations (1920). Return to text 3. This sentence is adapted from the opening sentence of my paper "Modern Central Banking" (1994), which was written for the conference celebrating the tercentenary of the Bank of England. See Capie and others (1994). Return to text 4. Note that the reference here is to the stabilization of inflation rather than just keeping inflation low. Return to text 5. While the dual mandate, with equal weight on employment and inflation, is exceptional among leading central banks, I believe that central banks with a legislated or declared sole or primary goal of maintaining price stability in practice rarely, if ever, act as if the level of employment or economic activity is of little concern. Return to text 6. See Rey (2015). Return to text 7. See, for example, Laurens and others (2015) for a comprehensive discussion on transitional monetary policy arrangements. For related papers, see Berg and others (forthcoming) and International Monetary Fund (2004, 2014). Return to text Last Update: June 30, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Share I am delighted to be here in Jackson Hole in the company of such distinguished panelists and such a distinguished group of participants. I will focus my remarks today on forces--domestic and international--that have been holding down inflation in the United States, 1 and some of the consequences of recent--primarily international--developments. Although the economy has continued to recover and the labor market is approaching our maximum employment objective, inflation has been persistently below 2 percent. That has been especially true recently, as the drop in oil prices over the past year, on the order of about 60 percent, has led directly to lower inflation as it feeds through to lower prices of gasoline and other energy items. As a result, 12-month changes in the overall personal consumption expenditure (PCE) price index have recently been only a little above zero ( chart 1 ). The past year's energy price declines ought to be largely a one-off event ( chart 2 ). That is, while futures markets suggest that the level of oil prices is expected to remain well below levels seen last summer, markets do not expect oil prices to fall further, so their influence in holding down inflation should be temporary. But measures of core inflation, which are intended to help us look through such transitory price movements, have also been relatively low (return to chart 1). The PCE index excluding food and energy is up 1.2 percent over the past year. The Dallas Fed's trimmed mean measure of the PCE price index is higher, at 1.6 percent, but still somewhat below our 2 percent objective. Moreover, these measures of core inflation have been persistently below 2 percent throughout the economic recovery. That said, as with total inflation, core inflation can be somewhat variable, especially at frequencies higher than 12-month changes. Moreover, note that core inflation does not entirely "exclude" food and energy, because changes in energy prices affect firms' costs and so can pass into prices of non-energy items. Inflation as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) generally sends the same broad message as does the PCE price index ( chart 3 ). That similarity should not be surprising, because the CPI is the most important input used for constructing PCE prices. On average, CPI inflation tends to run a few tenths higher than PCE inflation, and, because the CPI has a modestly larger weight on energy prices, fluctuations in the CPI measure tend to be a bit larger. Of course, ongoing economic slack is one reason core inflation has been low. Although the economy has made great progress, we started seven years ago from an unemployment rate of 10 percent, which guaranteed a lengthy period of high unemployment. Even so, with inflation expectations apparently stable, we would have expected the gradual reduction of slack to be associated with less downward price pressure. All else equal, we might therefore have expected both headline and core inflation to be moving up more noticeably toward our 2 percent objective. Yet, we have seen no clear evidence of core inflation moving higher over the past few years. This fact helps drive home an important point: While much evidence points to at least some ongoing role for slack in helping to explain movements in inflation, this influence is typically estimated to be modest in magnitude, and can easily be masked by other factors. 2 In the first instance, as already noted, core inflation can to some extent be influenced by oil prices. However, a larger effect comes from changes in the exchange value of the dollar, and the rise in the dollar over the past year is an important reason inflation has remained low ( chart 4 ). A higher value of the dollar passes through to lower import prices, which hold down U.S. inflation both because imports make up part of final consumption, and because lower prices for imported components hold down business costs more generally. In addition, a rise in the dollar restrains the growth of aggregate demand and overall economic activity, and so has some effect on inflation through that more indirect channel. 3 To get a sense of the timing and magnitude of these exchange rate effects, chart 5 shows dynamic simulations of a 10 percent real dollar appreciation, based on one of the models we maintain at the Federal Reserve. 4 The estimated pass-through from import prices to consumer price inflation occurs relatively quickly, with effects becoming evident within a quarter and the bulk of the overall effect occurring within one year. By contrast, the portion of the dollar effects on inflation that work through the channel of overall economic activity occurs with considerable lags. In the model shown here, the appreciation has its largest effect on gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the second year after the shock. Thus, it is plausible to think that the rise in the dollar over the past year would restrain growth of real GDP through 2016 and perhaps into 2017 as well. The rise in the dollar since last summer, of about 17 percent in nominal terms, with its associated declines in non-oil import prices, could plausibly be holding down core inflation quite noticeably this year. Commodity prices other than oil are also of relevance for inflation in the United States. Prices of metals and other industrial commodities, and agricultural products, are affected to a considerable extent by developments outside the United States, and the softness we've seen in these commodity prices, has in part reflected a slowing of demand from China and elsewhere. These prices likely have also been a factor in holding down inflation in the United States. The dynamics with which all these factors affect inflation depend crucially on the behavior of inflation expectations. One striking feature of the economic environment is that longer-term inflation expectations in the United States appear to have remained generally stable since the late 1990s ( chart 6 ). The source of that stability is open to debate, but the fact that the Fed has kept inflation relatively low and stable for three decades must be an important part of the explanation. Expectations that are not stable, but instead follow actual inflation up or down, would allow inflation to drift persistently. In the recent period, movements in inflation have tended to be transitory. For example, one might have expected the Great Recession to generate a downward wage-price spiral, but this did not occur. Thus, the stability of inflation expectations has prevented inflation from falling further below our objective than occurred, and it has enabled the Federal Open Market Committee to look through some upward inflation shocks without compromising price stability. 5 We should however be cautious in our assessment that inflation expectations are remaining stable. One reason is that measures of inflation compensation in the market for Treasury securities have moved down somewhat since last summer ( chart 7 ). But these movements can be hard to interpret, as at times they may reflect factors other than inflation expectations, such as changes in demand for the unparalleled liquidity of nominal Treasury securities. In announcing its July interest rate decision, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) said: In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. Can the Committee be "reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term"? As I have discussed, given the apparent stability of inflation expectations, there is good reason to believe that inflation will move higher as the forces holding down inflation dissipate further. While some effects of the rise in the dollar may be spread over time, some of the effects on inflation are likely already starting to fade. The same is true for last year's sharp fall in oil prices, though the further declines we have seen this summer have yet to fully show through to the consumer level. And slack in the labor market has continued to diminish, so the downward pressure on inflation from that channel should be diminishing as well. In addition, with regard to expectations of inflation, it is possible to consult the results of the SEP, the Survey of Economic Projections, which FOMC participants complete shortly before the March, June, September, and December meetings. In the June SEP, the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections for core PCE inflation was 1.3 percent to 1.4 percent this year, 1.6 percent to 1.9 percent next year, and 1.9 percent to 2.0 percent in 2017. There will be a new SEP for the forthcoming September meeting of the FOMC. Reflecting all these factors, the Committee has indicated in its post-meeting statements that it expects inflation to return to 2 percent. With regard to our degree of confidence in this expectation, we will need to consider all the available information and assess its implications for the economic outlook before coming to a judgment. In addition, the July announcement set a condition of requiring "some further improvement in the labor market." From May through July, non-farm payroll employment gains have averaged 235,000 per month. We now await the results of the August employment survey, which are due to be published on September 4. Of course, the FOMC's monetary policy decision is not a mechanical one, based purely on the set of numbers reported in the payroll survey and in our judgment on the degree of confidence members of the committee have about future inflation. We are interested also in aspects of the labor market beyond the simple U-3 measure of unemployment, including for example the rates of unemployment of older workers and of those working part-time for economic reasons; we are interested also in the participation rate. And in the case of the inflation rate we look beyond the rate of increase of PCE prices and define the concept of the core rate of inflation. While thinking of different aspects of unemployment, we are concerned mainly with trying to find the right measure of the difficulties caused to current and potential participants in the labor force by their unemployment. In the case of the core rate of inflation, we are mainly looking for a good indicator of future inflation, and for better indicators than we have at present. In making our monetary policy decisions, we are interested more in where the U.S. economy is heading than in knowing whence it has come. That is why we need to consider the overall state of the U.S. economy as well as the influence of foreign economies on the U.S. economy as we reach our judgment on whether and how to change monetary policy. That is why we follow economic developments in the rest of the world as well as the United States in reaching our interest rate decisions. At this moment, we are following developments in the Chinese economy and their actual and potential effects on other economies even more closely than usual. The Fed has, appropriately, responded to the weak economy and low inflation in recent years by taking a highly accommodative policy stance. By committing to foster the movement of inflation toward our 2 percent objective, we are enhancing the credibility of monetary policy and supporting the continued stability of inflation expectations. To do what monetary policy can do towards meeting our goals of maximum employment and price stability, and to ensure that these goals will continue to be met as we move ahead, we will most likely need to proceed cautiously in normalizing the stance of monetary policy. For the purpose of meeting our goals, the entire path of interest rates matters more than the particular timing of the first increase. With inflation low, we can probably remove accommodation at a gradual pace. Yet, because monetary policy influences real activity with a substantial lag, we should not wait until inflation is back to 2 percent to begin tightening. Should we judge at some point in time that the economy is threatening to overheat, we will have to move appropriately rapidly to deal with that threat. The same is true should the economy unexpectedly weaken. Finally, while I have been talking today about some international influences on economic conditions in the United States, I am well aware that, when the Federal Reserve tightens policy, this affects other economies. The Fed's statutory objectives are defined in terms of economic goals for the economy of the United States, but I believe that by meeting those objectives, and so maintaining a stable and strong macroeconomic environment at home, we will be best serving the global economy as well. 6 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. Among the many papers finding a role for resource utilization in affecting inflation based on evidence from macroeconomic time-series data, see Robert J. Gordon (2013), " The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery (PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 19390 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); or Douglas O. Staiger, James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (1997), " How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment? " in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 195-246. For similar results based on cross-sectional evidence, see Michael T. Kiley (2014), " An Evaluation of the Inflationary Pressure Associated with Short- and Long-Term Unemployment (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-28 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March); or, for wages instead of prices, Christopher L. Smith (2014), " The Effect of Labor Slack on Wages: Evidence from State-Level Relationships ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 2). Return to text 3. There has also been debate regarding other potential channels through which global factors could affect domestic inflation--for example, whether measures of foreign resource utilization play an important independent role. For evidence supporting such global factors, see Claudio Borio and Andrew Filardo (2007), " Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation (PDF) ," BIS Working Papers 227 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, May). For a more skeptical take, see Jane Ihrig, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (2007), " Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 891 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April). Return to text 4. For background information on this model, see Christopher Erceg, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2006), " SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for Policy Analysis (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2005-835 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). This model incorporates monetary policy responses to economic shocks and thus may show smaller effects on real GDP and inflation than other partial-equilibrium analyses. That said, the SIGMA model is just one of a number of models that the Board staff regularly consults to inform their analysis of the U.S. economy. Return to text 5. It is noteworthy that in several inflation-targeting economies, the ten year expected inflation rate has settled precisely at the target inflation rate. Return to text 6. For more discussion on this theme, see Stanley Fischer (2014), " The Federal Reserve and the Global Economy ," speech delivered at the 2014 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, Washington, October 11. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: August 29, 2015 Back to Top
