1 “The Bumpy Road to 2 Percent: Managing Inflation in the Current Economy” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The Commonwealth Club San Francisco, CA March 26, 2019 Remarks as prepared for delivery. Introduction Thank you for that kind introduction and warm welcome. Good afternoon, everyone. The Commonwealth Club’s history of providing forums for healthy public debate is well known, not only in the Bay Area but across the country. So it’s a real honor to be addressing you today. I became President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco just about six months ago. The monetary policy decisions we make at the Federal Open Market Committee eight times a year have wide-ranging implications. In fact, our work touches the lives of every American and countless global citizens. So this is a responsibility I take very seriously. And I’m here this afternoon to talk about how I see our economic landscape and what I’ll be paying attention to in the year ahead. But first, I need to issue the standard disclaimer: the remarks I’m about to deliver are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. 2 Current Conditions Let me begin by telling you about the Federal Reserve’s mission, and how we judge success. Our job is to promote a healthy and stable economy, and we do this by pursuing two goals. The first goal is maximum employment. This generally means that everyone who wants a job can get one. The second goal is price stability, which the Federal Reserve defines as an inflation rate of 2 percent.1 This allows the dollar in your pocket to hold its value over time. Taken together, we call this our dual mandate: maximum employment and price stability. So given that mandate and our two goals, it’s reasonable to ask, how’s the Fed been doing? Let’s start with the overall health of the economy. We’re on track to set a record for the longest period without a recession in U.S. history. It will extend past the 10-year mark this summer. The economy looks to have grown just over 3 percent in 2018, well above its sustainable pace. And while I see some signs of slowing on the horizon this year, I expect annual growth will come in around 2 percent—in line with its long-run trend.2 The strength of the economy has led to a robust labor market. In fact, the performance of the labor market has been nothing short of extraordinary. For example, last year we saw nearly 2.7 million jobs added to the payrolls. In addition to being a big number, that’s more than twice the amount we need to keep pace with new entrants and reentrants coming in to the labor force.3 Meanwhile, unemployment remains near its 50-year low. 1 Board of Governors (2012). 2 Fernald (2019). 3 Bidder, Mahedy, and Valletta (2016). 3 Economic models—as well as historical data—tell us that a prolonged economic expansion and a very tight labor market should be pushing inflation up to, or even above, our 2 percent goal. But that’s not what we’re experiencing today. Inflation has remained low—lower than our 2 percent target—for most of the past decade. We’ve grazed 2 percent here and there, including briefly last year. But it hasn’t been sustainable. So on our dual mandate report card, I feel good about where we are on employment—but a little less so about inflation. Disrupted Links So what’s up with inflation? Is it time to throw out our models and start from scratch? Have the fundamental laws of supply and demand broken down? And what does all of this mean for monetary policy? That’s what I’m going to spend the rest of my time today addressing—the inflation puzzle and what we should make of it. Let’s start by considering how the links between employment and inflation have traditionally functioned. To do that, we have to go back to Econ 101, and review how monetary policy affects the economy. In short, the Federal Reserve sets interest rates. These interest rates determine borrowing costs. Borrowing costs drive consumer and business spending, which in turn determines the level of economic activity. When economic activity is high, the labor market heats up. A hot labor market allows workers to demand higher wages. And employers pass these wage gains on to consumers in the form of higher prices. Those are the basics of how things work—in theory, at least. But as a policymaker, I have to focus on the practical. And in the real world, things crop up that disrupt the simple linkages between monetary policy and the economy. Because I’m an economist, I like to call these things “wedges.” And understanding these wedges goes a long way toward understanding the inflation puzzle we’re facing. 4 Wage and Price Wedges While there are several wedges that complicate the simple theory connecting monetary policy to the economy, the ones I will focus on today relate to employment, wages, and prices. As a Reserve Bank President, I spend a lot of time talking to businesses, workers, and community members about what they’re experiencing. And what’s loud and clear these days is that the labor market is changing. An example I hear again and again is the increasing demand from employees for alternative forms of compensation. Employers are being asked to provide benefits like free transportation, flexible workweeks, unlimited time off, and help with things like student loan repayment and even housing. Many employers are providing these benefits in an effort to attract and retain talent. And for some firms, they’ve become a meaningful part of employee compensation packages. The challenge for policymakers is that these alternative forms of payment aren’t being captured in the traditional measures we use to track wages and salaries. This creates a wedge between the strong labor market we observe and our available indicators of wage growth, and it mutes the signal we’re receiving about the strength of the economy. Another important wedge that’s been evolving over several decades is the loss of worker bargaining power.4 Declining unionization—along with increased automation and globalization—have made it harder for workers to push for higher pay, even in very healthy job markets.5 This weakens the link between employment and wage growth. Of course, workers aren’t the only group affected by these changing dynamics. Many firms have lost pricing power in a global marketplace, facing ever-increasing 4 Krueger (2018) and Farber et al. (2018). 5 Haldane (2018). 5 competition to hold onto customers.6 This means they have a harder time passing along rising costs, such as wages, to final goods prices. All of these wedges are contributing to the situation we have today: a strong economy with a tight labor market—but muted inflation.7 The Fed Wedge There’s another wedge weakening the link between economic activity and inflation, and it might surprise you. It’s the Fed. The actions of the Federal Reserve—and the success of its monetary policymaking decisions—have played an important role in keeping inflation tethered around 2 percent, in good times and bad. To explain how, we need to go back to one of those bad times. In the 1970s, a series of economic shocks hit. One shock was an oil embargo that pushed up oil prices. Because of the cost-of-living adjustments written into many workers’ contracts, this automatically translated into wage increases. These wage increases led to price increases. And when the Fed didn’t react aggressively enough to stem the rising inflation, a vicious cycle began. People started to think high inflation was just a fact of life. Inflation eventually peaked in the double digits. It wasn’t until the Fed raised interest rates dramatically that inflation finally started to decline. But, as some will remember, that was a painful process. Once inflation was under control, the Fed committed to keeping it that way. This commitment became a well-known and accepted position that people could depend on. And it ushered in the conditions that dominate today—the era of well- anchored inflation expectations. 6 Cavallo (2018), Guerrieri, Gust, and López-Salido (2010), and Rogoff (2006). 7 Hooper, Mishkin, and Sufi (2019), Galí and Gambetti (2018), Leduc and Wilson (2017), Blanchard (2016), and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015). 6 We see this shift in the data. Inflation expectations—of both businesses and consumers—started trending down in the late 1980s, and have remained close to the Fed’s 2 percent target since the mid-1990s.8 Well-anchored inflation expectations have great benefits. When people know that the Fed is committed to keeping inflation at 2 percent, they’re more likely to see inflation fluctuations as temporary, and stop short of building them into contracts like wage and rental agreements. In other words, when the Fed is credible, it’s easier for the economic system to absorb shocks. This keeps inflation from plummeting when the economy is weak, and a lid on inflation when the economy is strong.9 But here’s the twist. When the Federal Reserve is doing its job well, the link between economic activity and inflation is weaker—much like we see today. This is the essence of the “Fed wedge.” Maintaining Credibility in a Low-Inflation Environment So what does all of this mean for monetary policy? As I mentioned earlier, inflation has generally been low for the past decade. In fact, for the past seven years, inflation has consistently come in below our 2 percent target. This may not seem like much of a problem at first glance. After all, isn’t it a good thing when prices stay roughly the same? But too-low inflation has its own risks. It makes the chance of deflation—or negative inflation—more likely. And it makes it harder for the Fed to adjust interest rates in the face of economic shocks.10 8 Andreasen and Christensen (2016), Nechio (2015), and Williams (2006). 9 Jordà et al. (2019). 10 Bernanke (2002). 7 The bigger problem is that the Fed has explicitly stated that 2 percent is our goal, and that this goal is symmetric. This means we care just as much about long periods of too-low inflation as we do about long periods of too-high inflation.11 Inflation consistently below target tugs at inflation expectations. While there is no sign today that the anchor has drifted down significantly, we are seeing signs that inflation expectations are edging lower.12 This bears close watching. We need to be vigilant on this front, and work to deliver 2 percent inflation on a sustained basis. The Federal Reserve’s continued credibility with consumers and businesses depends on it. Conclusion Let me end with a few closing thoughts. The Federal Reserve’s credibility is one of our most important assets. It isn’t just about having people believe the things we say—though of course that’s important. Fed credibility is the foundation of our ability to make effective monetary policy. The American people put a lot of trust in the Federal Reserve System. We worked hard to earn that trust. We intend to keep earning it every day. Thank you. 11 Board of Governors (2019). 12 Daly (2019), Williams (2019), and Cao and Shapiro (2016). 8 References Andreasen, Martin M., and Jens H.E. Christensen. 2016. “TIPS Liquidity and the Outlook for Inflation.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-35 (November 21). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/november/tips-liquidity-and-the-outlook-for- inflation/ Bernanke, Ben S. 2002. “Deflation: Making Sure ‘It’ Doesn’t Happen Here.” Remarks before the National Economists Club, Washington, DC, November 21. https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2002/20021121/ Bidder, Rhys, Tim Mahedy, and Rob Valletta. 2016. “Trend Job Growth: Where’s Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-32 (October 24). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/trend-job-growth-where-is-normal/ Blanchard, Olivier. 2016. “The Phillips Curve: Back to the ’60s?” American Economic Review 106(5), pp. 31–34. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy.” Press release, January 25. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20120125c.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2019. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, March 20. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320a.htm Cao, Yifan, and Adam Hale Shapiro. 2016. “Energy’s Impact on Inflation Expectations.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-19 (June 20). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/june/energy-prices-and-inflation-expectations/ Cavallo, Alberto. 2018. “More Amazon Eﬀects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2018 Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 25. https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2018/amazon%20effect_caval lo_final.pdf Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1), pp. 197–232. Daly, Mary C. 2019. “Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?” Slides presented at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c- daly/2019/february/prospects-for-inflation-in-a-high-pressure-economy-is-the-phillips-curve- dead-or-is-it-just-hibernating/ 9 Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. “Unions and Inequality over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data.” NBER Working Paper 24587. Fernald, John. 2019. “FedViews, March 22.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/fedviews/2019/march/march-14- 2019/ Galí, Jordi, and Luca Gambetti. 2018. “Has the U.S. Wage Phillips Curve Flattened? A Semi- Structural Exploration.” Forthcoming in Changing Inflation Dynamics, Evolving Monetary Policy, eds. J. Gali and D. Saravia. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. http://www.crei.cat/wp- content/uploads/2019/03/ggchile_october2018-1.pdf Guerrieri, Luca, Christopher Gust, and J. David López-Salido. 2010. “International Competition and Inflation: A New Keynesian Perspective.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(4), pp. 247– 280. Haldane, Andrew G. 2018. “Market Power and Monetary Policy.” Speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2018 Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 24. https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2018/papersandhandouts/ma rket-power-and-monetary-policy-speech-by-andy-haldane.pdf Hooper, Peter, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi. 2019. “Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?” Paper presented to the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22. https://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/usmpf-paper Jordà, Òscar, Chitra Marti, Fernanda Nechio, and Eric Tallman. 2019. “Inflation: Stress-Testing the Phillips Curve.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2019-05 (February 11). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2019/february/inflation-stress-testing-phillips-curve/ Krueger, Alan B. 2018. “Reflections on Dwindling Worker Bargaining Power and Monetary Policy.” Luncheon address to the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2018 Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 24. https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2018/kcfedlunchremarks- aspreparedfordeliveryv2.pdf Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel J. Wilson. 2017. “Has the Wage Phillips Curve Gone Dormant?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-30 (October 16). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2017/october/has-wage-phillips-curve-gone-dormant/ Nechio, Fernanda. 2015. “Have Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declined?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-11 (April 6). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/april/low-long-term-inflation-survey-based-forecast/ Rogoff, Kenneth. 2006. “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy.” In The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, proceedings of the 2006 Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 265–305. https://www.kansascityfed.org/Publicat/Sympos/2006/PDF/19Rogoff.pdf 10 Williams, John C. 2006. “Inflation Persistence in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2006-27 (October 13). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2006/october/inflation-persistence-in-an-era-of-well-anchored-inflation-expectations/ Williams, John C. 2019. “Discussion of ‘Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?’ by Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi.” Remarks at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22. https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2019/wil190222

Monetary Strategies in Practice 2019 Hoover Monetary Policy Conference May 3, 2019 Mary C. Daly President and CEO The views expressed here are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 2 • Good practice to reassess our strategies, tools and communications (Bank of Canada does this regularly) • More likely to hit effective lower bound in the future • Frequently will be fighting inflation from below target • Inflation expectations matter Why Review Our Framework? More Limited Space for Funds Rate Cuts 3 4 Inflation Consistently Short of 2% Target 5 Inflation Expectations Matter More Now Note: Specification uses headline CPI inflation. One-year ahead inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Source: Jordà, Marti, Nechio, and Tallman (FRBSF Economic Letter, 2019). Coefficient on Lagged Inflation and Inflation Expectations 6 Three viable alternative strategies at the ELB • Nominal income targeting • Price-level targeting • Average-inflation targeting Achieving Target Inflation in the Future All Designed to “Make Up” For Misses 7 Symmetric Inflation Targeting Average Inflation targeting Period 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Inflation% 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 % 8Period 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Inflation% 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 % Symmetric Inflation Targeting Average Inflation targeting All Designed to “Make Up” For Misses 9 • Good make-up properties • Easier to communicate than NIT or PLT • But important questions remain: •Is the required averaging window of “reasonable” length? • Is AIT effective if expectations are backward looking? • Does AIT work well if some households do not participate in financial markets? • Would AIT be credible? • Should it be a temporary policy at the ELB? Focus on Average Inflation Targeting 10 • New Keynesian economy (Amano, Gnocchi, Leduc) • 20% of households with no access to financial markets • 75% of firms with backward-looking expectations • ELB binds 20% of the time • CB minimizes inflation and output gaps using rule: 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 +𝜙 1 𝑛 σ𝑘=0 𝑛 𝜋𝑡−𝑘 − ത𝜋 • With 𝜙=1.5, n=6 quarters A Framework to Assess AIT 11 Evaluating Monetary Frameworks Amano, Gnocchi, and Leduc (2019) 12 Amano, Gnocchi, and Leduc (2019) Evaluating Monetary Frameworks 13 Amano, Gnocchi, and Leduc (2019) Evaluating Monetary Frameworks 14 • Credibility is critical • Need to adopt regime before ELB episodes • Implies a willingness to disinflate if necessary Credibility: Make-up Work Both Ways Make-up 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 2 3 4 5 Inflation% 15 Credibility of IT Regime Achieved Over Time 16 • With Fed objectives met, good time to review framework • AIT is an attractive option, but credibility would be key • Still, bar for change is high • A lot of analysis, discussion, and debate is still needed Summary

FINAL 1 “Bloom Where You’re Planted”* Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Syracuse University Commencement Syracuse, NY May 12, 2019 11:00AM ET Remarks as prepared for delivery. *This speech is dedicated to all those who helped me get here. Introduction Wow. This is awesome, and I’m not even graduating. Such a big crowd. So much excitement. Before I begin, I want all the graduates – and only the graduates – to give yourselves a big round of applause. This is a special day, and I want you to take in its meaningfulness. The last time I was here, I was getting my Ph.D. and serving as a graduation marshal. I was excited, of course, but also slightly nervous that I would mess up my role as flag bearer during our procession. This is way more responsibility. But luckily, I don’t have to carry anything. Chancellor Syverud, thank you so much for entrusting me with this honor. And thank you for that very kind introduction. Since becoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, I’ve listened to a lot of introductions about myself. FINAL 2 There is a common thread in all of them. An ‘unlikely’ path. GED to PhD to CEO. Forty years of life condensed into three, rarely seen together, acronyms. The question that almost always follows is: How did it happen? Am I exceptional? Did I see forty years ago the life I have today? The answer is simple: not at all. Betsy Forty years ago, I was sitting in the parking lot of a McDonald’s near Ballwin, Missouri, where I grew up. I had driven there to meet a woman named Betsy, a friend of my high school guidance counselor. Betsy was in her mid-30s, a successful woman, busy building her life and career. I was 15, my family was in chaos, I’d dropped out of high school, and I was living with friends. My counselor thought Betsy could help. Betsy had the fanciest car I had ever seen. It had a tan leather interior, and when the sun shined in, it felt warm and safe. It was a refuge. My counselor was right. Betsy took me under her wing. She encouraged me to get a GED. She paid $216 for my first semester of college. [I know, it’s hard to believe.] And that started the journey that led me here, to a PhD from Syracuse University. But those are the highlights of the story, and they don’t capture how Betsy really changed my life. Sitting in that car, feeling like my world was out of control, I wanted Betsy to give me answers, to fix things. Instead, she told me: “Mary, you have to bloom where you’re planted.” FINAL 3 I was shocked. I immediately protested. I said it wasn’t fair. I didn’t know how to manage my life. I was only 15. It all seemed too much. I blamed others. I blamed myself. For a moment, I even blamed her. I felt lost. How was I going to make it? So she said it again. More gently this time. Mary, you have to bloom where you’re planted. Building resiliency The fact that you have to start from where you are is hard. It’s an easy statement to understand, but a much tougher one to accept. Life can be unfair. Not everyone begins from the same position. And as you go out in the world, you may find yourself short of where you think you should be. Sometimes it knocks the wind out of you. Sometimes it makes you angry. It always leaves you feeling a little unsure. My situation was tough. Betsy never denied it. But she told me that I had one life, and I shouldn’t let it be defined by the bad draw I’d gotten. Her advice was to accept my frustration and sadness, and let it inform – but not determine – my future. Let it serve as a reminder, but not a barrier. I’ll be honest… accepting my situation was difficult. But I also found it freeing. It meant I could change my life. That my presence mattered. That I had some say in my own success. It helped me be resilient, and it allowed me to bounce back, make my way, and stand in front of you today. FINAL 4 Bloom where you’re planted But acceptance and blooming aren’t the same. So how do you thrive? For me, it’s been about being open. Every week when I saw Betsy, she had a new book for me. Sometimes it was about art, sometimes history, maybe even poetry. And always, there were the biographies. I drank it all in. And it let me live in a world beyond my own experience. My father was a postman. My mom stayed home and took care of us. I had loved school, but the challenges of our daily lives consumed me. And they crowded out my interest in other things. They made me insular, and inward- facing. They left me feeling alone. Betsy’s books took me outside myself. They generated ideas – perspectives I’d never considered, concepts I’d never thought of. They also showed me paths – taken by other people, people I didn’t know – that seemed completely improbable and wildly unrealistic. They sparked hope. So when Betsy suggested I get a GED, I was willing to give it a try. Growing into yourself But that’s not the end of the story. Betsy is a nudger. I’d get one thing done, and she would suggest another, even more improbable sounding possibility. Once I had a GED, she suggested I go to college. I’d never imagined college – I’d barely heard of it. But I wanted to be like Betsy. And I certainly didn’t want to let her down. So I went. FINAL 5 I was in way over my head during my first semesters of college. Familiar feelings crept in. Fear, mostly. A sense that maybe I didn’t belong, and I couldn’t make it. So I worked day and night, and took as many classes as allowed, all in an attempt to catch up and boost my confidence. I told myself I could fake it until I made it. And I did make it. But not in the linear, predictable fashion you might think. I graduated with a degree in economics… and philosophy. But I loved the arts, and got my first jobs out of college at a theatre, and a dance company. Eventually I returned to economics and public policy, which brought me to Syracuse. And after getting a PhD in microeconomics and social policy, I chose a job working on macroeconomics and monetary policy at the San Francisco Fed. Now when people hear these details, they often conclude that I must be amazingly self-assured. But the truth is, I’ve spent years struggling with my confidence. Wondering when, not if, I would be found out. When would people dig through the veneer I had created and discover that, beneath the degrees, the accomplishments, and the contributions, I was simply an imposter – that scared kid in Betsy’s car. Here is the big reveal. True confidence came only recently for me. Mostly because I spent years focusing on the wrong thing. Other people weren’t waiting to criticize me, or judge me for my past. I was doing that to myself. I was constantly trying to rise above my background. The secret all along was to just embrace it. FINAL 6 My experiences absolutely define me, but in a way I hadn’t been able to see. They make me focus on others, be tolerant of fresh starts, celebrate wins, and look for ways to contribute. In other words, I’m not who I am despite my life. I am who I am because of it. Don’t go it alone So with all those shrouds of doubt laying over me, how did I ever come to see who I was? With the help of many others. We’re often taught to admire people who pull themselves up by their bootstraps and forge a path completely on their own. It can make it hard to be vulnerable, and ask someone for help. But I didn’t have the luxury of standing alone when I met Betsy at 15. And it taught me that we all need Betsys – in fact, we need a lot of them throughout our lives. A few years ago, I received an award from my undergraduate school – the University of Missouri-Kansas City – for ‘defying the odds.’ Winning the award was a great honor. But the most amazing part was getting to invite all the people who had helped me get there. My wife Shelly and I hosted a dinner of gratitude. Betsy was there, of course. But so was my sixth grade best friend… my undergraduate economics professor – a fellow Syracuse grad! – who drove from Phoenix to attend… the couple who brought me into their home in Kansas City when I felt homesick. And there were many others, too. FINAL 7 They all had one thing in common. They had been my supporters. Listening when I needed to talk, believing in me when I lost faith, and pushing me when I got stuck. When I looked around that table, I can tell you with complete certainty that my life wasn’t lesser because I’d gotten help along the way. It was far, far richer. Embrace your path Today is about celebrating your accomplishments. It’s about taking in your time here, and looking forward to your future. But my advice isn’t for today. It’s for all your future days. The ones that make you stretch and grow as you learn who you are, and what you want to contribute. And on those days, I hope you’ll be open. Open to opportunities you haven’t yet conceived of, and to paths you’ve never imagined. Don’t worry if your journey wanders, or if your seemingly perfect plans end up being not quite right. This is just part of exploring, and it helps you figure out what’s right for you. And when something goes wrong, and fear and worry creep in, I hope you’ll remember Betsy’s words: You have to bloom where you’re planted. You may not always be in control of where you land. But you can absolutely decide how you’re going to live there. Own your situation. Let it make you resilient. Let it fuel your confidence. Be vulnerable enough to ask for help, and be brave enough to take it. FINAL 8 If you do these things, I promise: you’ll be great. Able to thrive in the most unlikely of places. Able to achieve the completely improbable and the wildly unrealistic. Thank you, and congratulations. I can’t wait to see who you become.

FINAL 1 “Becoming Owners: The Business Case for Customer-Centered Banking” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance Singapore June 3, 2019 9:45AM SGT Remarks as prepared for delivery. Introduction Thank you for that kind introduction, Ravi, and for being the gracious host of this year’s symposium. The Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco have partnered on this event for the past several years. But this is my first time making the trip to Singapore – and I’m really excited to be here. Now, before I begin, I have to give the standard disclaimer: the remarks I’m about to deliver are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. Navigating headwinds Banking for the common good. It’s a natural evolution of the conversations we’ve been having at this event, and many like it, for the past several years. FINAL 2 Being more customer-focused… using finance to create inclusive growth… understanding the role that organizational culture plays in all of it… these are hot topics for both the financial services industry and regulatory institutions.1 And progress has been made.2 Yet consumers remain wary – even a little skeptical – of financial firms. I’ve got a front row seat for this in the San Francisco Bay Area. There are a lot of people willing to turn to Big Tech – and away from Big Banks – when it comes to managing their finances. A study last year found that 58 percent of Americans would be willing to move their banking to non-traditional financial companies like Amazon or Google.3 And it makes sense. Banks are still repairing the breach of trust caused by the global financial crisis. Repeated scandals showed that banks weren’t always good actors. Poor corporate culture and profit-first practices created significant consequences for consumers.4 People lost homes, retirement savings, college funds… a sense of security. It left deep scars. Since then, much-needed regulations have improved the resiliency of the financial system, making future crises less likely. This has helped boost confidence in the industry. But the world didn’t stand still while banks worked to recover their credibility with the public. Technology-based competitors emerged with customer-centric approaches to finance. 1 Bailey (2018), Menon (2019), and Lagarde (2019). 2 De Nederlandsche Bank (2015) and Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (2016). 3 Center for the Digital Future at USC Annenberg (2018). 4 Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2018) and Williams (2018). FINAL 3 They offered targeted products, tailor-made to serve the needs of a diverse customer base. They worked to keep costs low, and efficiency and convenience high. Notably, these firms also talked about the broader good, and how their business models help promote a better future.5 Putting these things together, traditional financial institutions are facing some pretty strong headwinds. And they’re headwinds that can’t be addressed through regulatory guardrails alone. So what can be done? Here’s my view: banks – large and small – need to become owners. Owners who are committed to – and accountable for – doing right by their customers and their communities. You might be thinking that sounds like a lot. Or maybe that it’s even too high of a standard. But speaking from experience, I can tell you: it is possible. Becoming owners The Federal Reserve System faced its own challenges in the wake of the financial crisis. Public trust in our institution plummeted, and it’s been slow to come back.6 And like private-sector firms, we face an ever-changing landscape, and a highly competitive environment for the best ideas and talent. This was especially true at our Bank, with its proximity to Silicon Valley. So about four years ago, the San Francisco Fed decided to take a hard look at our own organization. What was working? What wasn’t? Our culture soon emerged as one of the biggest areas in need of improvement. So we decided to change it. 5 Menon (2019). 6 Saad (2019) and Gallup (2019). FINAL 4 We started with the basics. We focused not only on what employees do, but also how they do it. And we emphasized skills and behaviors that would enable our best work… things like collaboration, emotional intelligence, influence, and critical thinking. This was our starting point – our foundation. But something was still missing. To really get to the next level, it became clear we needed to do more. We needed to become owners. Ready to hold ourselves accountable to our mission, vision, and values – no excuses. Prepared to trust our employees to do the right thing – even when no one is watching, and even when there isn’t a detailed rulebook to follow. This transition to a culture of owners hasn’t been easy. And we’re far from done. But embracing this mindset has changed us – and for the better. So I want to share with you what we’ve learned. Defining your values The first step in becoming an owner is defining your values. What do you believe in? How will you go about achieving your mission and vision? At the Federal Reserve, we’re tasked with a dual mandate – promoting full employment and price stability. We also support safe and sound banking and payment systems. That’s our mission. At the San Francisco Fed, we want to be the best in public service. That’s our vision. Our values are something different – but equally important. FINAL 5 They’re spelled out on a banner that greets every person who walks into our lobby each day. It says: “Our work touches every American and countless global citizens.” That’s our core value – service. Service to the people and the communities we represent. That’s the reason we show up to work every day. That’s our touchstone. Building trust Defining your values is essential. But it’s only the beginning of building a culture of ownership. To give values life, and make them real for every individual you work with, you have to take action. And those actions have to be rooted in trust – the trust that your people will act in the interest of others and the organization. Let me give you an example. This is what the San Francisco Fed’s employee handbook used to look like. It was created with the best of intentions: to help people become successful members of our team. But what it turned into is pretty intimidating. It’s heavy. It has a lot of rules. Worst of all, it sends the message that we need to micro-manage and monitor the very people we’re counting on to be our ambassadors – our employees. This is the opposite of trust. So we threw the whole thing out. Here’s the new one. Big difference. I can carry it around with me, for one thing. FINAL 6 Gone are the lists of dos and don’ts. In their place is a new mindset – one that defaults to the positive. It describes our values, and calls on employees to uphold them using their best judgment. Most importantly, the new handbook moves away from solving for potential bad behavior, and instead emphasizes the expectation of good behavior. We followed the new handbook with more radical moves. We told people they could “dress for their day,” and “flex for their day,” and “stop doing it” if certain processes no longer added value. Not surprisingly, all these changes caused some heartburn. You might be thinking about all the things that could go wrong. What if people take advantage? What if we can no longer get our work done? I get it. Conducting business this way requires a lot of trust at every level of the organization. And people are going to bump into each other as they figure things out. So it’s important to have a plan in place for mitigating those conflicts. Part of this can be achieved by simply acknowledging that growing pains are a natural part of the process. But it’s equally important for leaders to model how situations should be evaluated when judgment – rather than a rule book – is the deciding factor. Employees take their cues from the top, especially during times of change. So it’s essential for all of us to hold ourselves accountable to the values we’ve defined, even if it’s uncomfortable or unpopular in the short term. If you’re willing to do this, I know you’ll be pleasantly surprised. Living without a detailed rulebook is possible – if you’ve defined the right values, and empowered employees to act in the best interest of your organization and its customers. FINAL 7 They’ll do the right thing – even if no one is watching, and even when they face uncharted territory. Committing to a growth mindset So once you’ve defined your values, and built an environment of trust, how do you keep growing? How do you stay agile? There are two essential ingredients for success: diversity of thought, and inclusion of ideas. Now, I’m not talking about optical diversity, where you simply set the table with people who look different. I mean true diversity, where you encourage new ideas and differences of opinion, and include them equally in the discussion. Put simply: listening to a wide variety of viewpoints produces better outcomes. It ensures you’re considering all angles. And it makes you aware of issues and problems that aren’t even on your radar. I’ve found this particularly valuable as a new leader. I’m naturally a fast talker. I love nothing more than batting ideas back and forth like a ping pong ball. I’ll get excited, interrupt, draw on a whiteboard – it’s an event, a brainstorming mania. But I recently had an epiphany. Not everyone is like me. And in my excitement to jump in first, I was crowding out lots of other good ideas. I was inadvertently pushing people onto the sidelines. So I started writing notes to myself, reminding me to slow down. I’ve worked harder to include more introverted voices, or remote employees who find it difficult to interject on the phone. And I’ve told others around me to hold me accountable to this goal. FINAL 8 It’s a work in progress. But I’m happy to report that a number of quieter voices have emerged and become valuable contributors at my table. And they’re helping to transform our organization. Making the business case This is what’s working for us at the San Francisco Fed. But you may be thinking: Sure, this sounds great for a public service organization. Your job is to pursue the common good. How would this work in the private sector, at a profit-making bank? And I’d like to answer that question with two stories. The CEO of the online retailer Zappos once wrote an article in the Harvard Business Review to explain how his company had earned its reputation for delivering best-in-class customer service.7 And he told a story about a woman who called in after forgetting to mail back a pair of shoes she’d planned to return. There’d been a death in her family. So the Zappos rep sent her flowers. That’s the kind of thing that’s possible when employees are empowered to act as ambassadors for your values. Yes, that phone rep may have spent $50 to do the right thing – but as the CEO himself said: “now she’s a customer for life.” This works for shoes. And I can tell you from personal experience that it also works for banks. When I was 16 years old, I needed a checking account. I was working full-time and needed to pay rent and utilities – and they only took checks. 7 Hsieh (2010). FINAL 9 So I found myself at a bank in Ballwin, Missouri, where I grew up. And when I talked to the new accounts clerk, I found out that minors couldn’t open an account without a parent’s signature – bank policy. But both of my parents were out of the picture. When I explained my situation to the clerk, she decided to take a chance. She opened my account. Helped me fill out the deposit form, and select my checks. She even took a few minutes to explain the basics of banking, so I could avoid any overdrafts and fees. She wasn’t a manager. She didn’t have to do this. But she did. She led with her values, and the values of her organization. She put my need for a checking account at the center of her business. And that stuck with me. I stayed a customer at her bank for almost 20 years. Aligning interests We have a phrase in economics – incentive compatibility – that describes this situation. It’s the moment when the planets align, and what’s good for me, is good for you, is good for society. We’re at that moment now for the financial services industry. If you’re willing to become an owner… if you’re willing to put your customers and communities at the center of your business… banking for the common good will move beyond the title of this conference, and become the new industry norm. Thank you. FINAL 10 References Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 2016. Informational Paper: Risk Culture. October. https://www.apra.gov.au/sites/default/files/161018-information-paper- risk-culture1.pdf Bailey, Andrew. 2018. “The Role of Regulation in Encouraging Good Culture.” Speech delivered at the Investment Association Culture Conference, Mansion House, London, United Kingdom, November 6. https://www.fca.org.uk/news/speeches/role-regulation-encouraging- good-culture Center for the Digital Future at USC Annenberg. 2018. The Future of Money and Banking Study. April. https://www.digitalcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Future-of- Money-and-Banking-Report-Center-for-the-Digital-Future-April-2018.pdf De Nederlandsche Bank. 2015. Behavior and Culture in the Dutch Financial Sector. https://www.dnb.nl/en/binaries/Behaviour%20and%20Culture%20in% 20the%20Dutch%20financial%20sector_tcm47-380399.pdf Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2018. Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Progress, Challenges, and the Next Generation of Leaders. Summary of Governance and Culture Reform Conference. June 18. https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/governance-and- culture-reform/2018-NewYorkFed-Culture-Conference-Summary.pdf Gallup. 2019. “2019 04 17 Agency Ratings Topline.” Gallup complete question responses and trends, April 17. https://news.gallup.com/file/poll/257525/2019%2004%2017%20Agenc y%20ratings%20topline.pdf Hsieh, Tony. 2010. “How I Did It: Zappos’s CEO on Going to Extremes for Customers.” Harvard Business Review. July–August. https://hbr.org/2010/07/how-i-did-it-zapposs-ceo-on-going-to-extremes- for-customers FINAL 11 Lagarde, Christine. 2019. “The Financial Sector: Redefining a Broader Sense of Purpose.” 32nd World Traders’ Tacitus Lecture, London, United Kingdom, February 28. https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2019/02/21/sp022819-md-the- financial-sector-redefining-a-broader-sense-of-purpose Menon, Ravi. 2019. “Can the Three Musketeers Click? Finance, Technology, Trust.” Speech at the Bank of France Lecture, Paris, France, May 14. https://www.bis.org/review/r190514d.htm Saad, Lydia. 2019. “Postal Service Still Americans’ Favorite Federal Agency.” Gallup. May 13. https://news.gallup.com/poll/257510/postal-service-americans-favorite- federal-agency.aspx Williams, John C. 2018. “Now Is the Time for Banking Culture Reform.” Remarks at Governance and Culture Reform Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, June 18. https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2018/wil180618
