1 Economic Outlook, January 2015 January 9, 2015 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Virginia Bankers Association and Virginia Chamber of Commerce 2015 Financial Forecast Richmond, Va. It’s a pleasure to be with you to discuss the economic outlook this afternoon. Before I begin, I would like to emphasize that these are my own views and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 To put the current outlook in context, it helps to take a glance at the rearview mirror. This expansion has been much slower than any other expansion that anyone in this room is likely to remember. Real GDP, for example — our best single gauge of overall economic activity — has increased at an annual rate of 2 ¼ percent per year since the recession ended in the second quarter of 2009. In contrast, the half century before the recession began — including both expansions and recessions — saw real GDP grow at an average rate of around 3 ½ percent. That lengthy period of rapid growth naturally encouraged a strong sense that growth ought to be at least 3 percent and that anything less is disappointing. Two fundamental factors contribute to GDP growth over the longer run. One is population growth, which has slowed appreciably in recent years. Since the end of the recession, the so- called prime working age population, which consists of individuals ages 25 to 54, has actually declined. Baby boomers are moving out of the age ranges associated with peak labor force participation. In contrast, in the 50 years before the recession, the prime working age population grew at a rate of 1.3 percent per year. Thus a good part of the recent slowing of GDP growth is simply slower population growth. The other fundamental component of growth is the increase in real GDP per worker, which is a measure of productivity. Since the end of the recession, this measure of productivity has increased at a 1.4 percent annual rate, well below the average rate over the five decades before the recession. So a good portion of the recent slowing of GDP growth is also attributable to slower productivity growth. The remainder of the difference between pre- and post-recession growth is much smaller and is accounted for by the change in the ratio of employment to population — in other words, the combined effect of changes in unemployment and labor force participation. As the economy recovered from the Great Recession and real GDP growth continued to disappoint, most economists scaled back their expectations regarding future growth. In fact, one 2 plausible scenario is for U.S. economic performance over the near term to closely resemble the average experience over the last five years — that is, real growth around 2 ¼ percent per year. A somewhat brighter scenario is looking more plausible to me now, however. In recent quarters growth has been noticeably better than the post-recession average. Real GDP has increased by 2.7 percent over the last four quarters, versus 2.1 percent over the previous three years. Payroll employment rose by an average of 246,000 jobs per month over the 12 months ending in December, whereas it rose by an average of 185,000 jobs per month over the previous three years. Granted, we’ve seen short-run growth spurts before during the course of this expansion, only to see the pace of growth subside. But some recent developments that were largely absent during previous spurts have improved the likelihood that the recent pickup in growth will be sustained. I would point first to consumer behavior. Household spending represents about two-thirds of GDP, and thus it is critical to headline growth. From the end of the recession to November 2013, consumer spending rose at an average annual rate of 2.4 percent. Over the 12 months ending in November 2014, however, consumer spending has expanded by 2.8 percent. And over the six months ending in November, consumer spending has grown at a 4.3 percent annual rate, the highest six-month growth rate since the middle of 2005. This pickup in household spending was accompanied by an increase in real disposable income over the last year. But the increase was not as large as the rise in spending in recent months, and thus the personal saving rate has fallen. A declining saving rate in this situation typically signals consumer confidence that the increase in incomes is solidly based and likely to continue. And other indicators point to the same conclusion. In the latter half of last year, the major survey measures of consumer sentiment all moved back to levels not seen since before the recession began. In particular, survey components related to expectations regarding future income and finances have shown notable strength. Direct readings on labor market conditions suggest that consumers may have good reason for improved confidence in their employment prospects. I’ve already mentioned last year’s improvement in employment growth. The decline in the headline unemployment rate, which peaked at 10 percent in 2009, also picked up pace last year and was down to 5.6 percent in December. And the number of persons who were unemployed for over 26 weeks has fallen by 57 percent since 2010. We’ve seen noteworthy improvements in measures of turnover in labor markets as well. The number of job openings is up 20 percent year-over-year, and the hiring rate has increased significantly. Moreover, “quits” are up 20 percent year-over-year, suggesting that workers are becoming more confident in their job prospects. The fact that these indicators of labor market “flows” are showing strong improvement is significant, I think. During this expansion, some observers noted that measures of labor market “fluidity” or “dynamism” appeared to be depressed relative to historical standards. In that context, the recent flow data suggests some progress toward restoring the vitality of labor markets. 3 We also know that a substantial improvement in labor markets has been associated historically with stronger wage and salary growth. The employment cost index, which is a comprehensive measure of wages and benefits for private-sector workers, has increased at a 3 percent annual rate over the last two quarters. That is well above its 1.9 percent annual growth over the previous five years. I should caution that a similar acceleration is not evident in other prominent measures of wages, so this is just tentative evidence at this point. If labor market conditions continue to improve in the months ahead, it should provide further support to household incomes and confidence. The improvement we’ve seen in consumer finances in recent years should also bolster growth. The value of household assets has increased by 38 percent since early 2009, while household liabilities have fallen slightly over the same time period. While the process of balance sheet repair may not yet be complete, substantial progress clearly has been made. Recent advances in consumer sentiment and financial wherewithal have not invigorated the housing market, however. Over the last 12 months, new home sales have fallen by 1.6 percent and new housing starts have fallen by 7 percent. Much of this sluggishness, I believe, is due to factors that are unlikely to change quickly. The fall in home prices during the recession has given households a greater appreciation of the risks of leveraged investments in housing. This is contributing to what appears to be a relatively persistent shift in preferences away from ownership of single-family detached homes. So while I expect some gains in housing activity in 2015, I don’t think we should look for housing to make major contributions to overall growth. In contrast, business investment in plant, equipment and intellectual property has been a solid contributor to this expansion. Coming out of the recession, this measure of investment grew rapidly for a couple of years, then more moderately, but it picked up steam in the second quarter last year. Business investment seemed to be carrying good momentum into the year-end, and in my view is likely to continue to contribute to growth in overall activity in 2015. Net exports are likely to be more of a challenge this year. Over the last year, the value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets has risen by 8 percent. That makes imports more attractive here and domestic producers less competitive globally, which can be expected to increase our trade deficit and slow the growth of overall economic production. Finally, federal government spending on goods and services is likely to continue to restrain growth. Over the last three years, we’ve seen such spending fall at a 2.5 percent annual rate. That may sound surprising, but note that this is only spending for goods and services, and it excludes transfer payments, such as Medicare or food stamps. These transfer payments do not add directly to GDP; their only effect is through household incomes. Most forecasters are projecting federal spending to contract further in 2015 and beyond. You are probably well aware of the importance of federal spending on goods and services for Virginia; for example, close to 13 percent of all federal contract spending in fiscal year 2014 landed in the commonwealth. Northern Virginia has been hit hard by reduced spending with government contractors, and the Hampton Roads area has been hit hard by defense cuts. Virginia’s revenue stream has been significantly affected as well, which will make this year’s 4 legislative session particularly challenging. The broader context to bear in mind, though, is that the state generally fared better than the rest of the nation prior to and during the most recent recession. To sum up, the key consumer sector has picked up in recent months, and I believe the growth we’ve seen recently is more solidly based and is likely to continue. Business investment should also contribute to growth this year, but residential investment probably won’t add much. Federal spending and net exports will likely subtract from overall activity. Taking stock of the recent data, I believe the odds are better now that the current pickup in growth will be sustained. In this higher-growth scenario we could see real GDP grow by 2 ½ to 3 percent in 2015. We should not completely dismiss, however, a more temperate scenario in which growth reverts once again to the post-recession average of around 2 ¼ percent. Throughout this expansion we have seen periods of growth that were vigorous enough to get our hopes up but were followed by lower growth intervals that left the average growth rate fairly low. On balance, though, while we don’t have enough evidence to rule out a return to a more moderate growth path, I am leaning toward the higher-growth scenario as more likely. Turning to inflation, let me start by noting that in 2012 the Federal Open Market Committee stated that its inflation goal was for the price index for personal consumption expenditures to rise at a 2 percent annual rate over time. Over the last 25 years that measure of inflation has averaged 2.06 percent per year. I am old enough to remember when the president of the United States declared that inflation was “Public Enemy Number One.” So I am grateful that the Fed took responsibility for inflation and has kept inflation under control. That long-run record may explain why survey measures of expected inflation have been remarkably stable over the last several years, despite the turmoil of the Great Recession and widespread media speculation about deflation or inflation. At short time horizons, inflation can be volatile, however, and over the last year inflation has only averaged 1.2 percent. As you probably suspect, much of that weakness reflects the decline in energy prices. Prior to the fall in energy prices, the 12-month PCE inflation rate was 1.7 percent — not that far from 2 percent. To get a sense of the near-term direction of inflation, many economists look at core price indices, which exclude the volatile food and energy categories. Core inflation over the last year was 1.4 percent — a bit higher than overall inflation but still below 2 percent and down a bit from earlier last year. In past episodes of large energy price movements, we have seen some bleed through into core inflation, and that seems to be happening again. As a result, inflation trends may be a bit more difficult to discern in coming months. Nonetheless, I expect inflation to move tolerably close to the FOMC’s 2 percent target after the fall in energy prices has played out. I’ll conclude with a few remarks on monetary policy. The Fed entered 2015 with a balance sheet of unprecedented size — around $4.5 trillion — and interest rates very close to zero. We are widely expected to begin raising interest rates this year, and in September the FOMC issued a statement outlining how it will go about doing that. Here are the key takeaways from that document. When the time comes, the Committee will raise its target range for the federal funds rate (the market interest rate on interbank loans). Currently, the target range is zero to 25 basis 5 points. Second, the Fed will move the federal funds rate into the target range primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays to banks on excess reserve balances, which is currently 25 basis points. Third, sometime after raising the interest rate target, the Fed will begin gradually reducing its balance sheet by allowing maturing security holdings to run off, rather than be reinvested, as is current practice. And fourth, the Fed will move in the longer run toward holding only U.S. Treasury securities and will hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. That basic framework pertains to how the Fed intends to move toward more normal levels of interest rates and asset holdings. I suspect some of you are just as avidly interested, if not more so, in when and how rapidly the Fed will raise rates. I hate to disappoint you, but the truth is nobody knows yet. There is no pre-set timetable for raising rates. The FOMC’s actions genuinely will depend on the economic data available at the time. So I cannot tell you when and, more importantly, how rapidly our rate target will rise. I will share an observation, however. The economic outlook can change rapidly, and judgments about appropriate policy need to respond accordingly. It’s not hard to find historical examples: The outlook for real activity shifted dramatically from late 1998, when overseas turmoil was thought to jeopardize U.S. growth, to early 1999, when it became clear that the effects would be minimal and activity was accelerating. Similarly, the outlook for growth and inflation shifted significantly from mid-2003, when inflation seemed to be sinking below 1 percent, to early 2004, when growth and inflation were clearly rising. Arguably, the Fed fell at least somewhat behind the curve in each case. The lesson, I believe, is that policymakers should strive to look through clearly transitory phenomena to assess the underlying real economic developments that — as long as inflation is anchored — determine the appropriate path for interest rates. And they need to be prepared to respond promptly. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 Education, Innovation and Economic Growth February 10, 2015 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2015 Emerging Issues Forum Raleigh Convention Center, Raleigh, N.C. Good morning. It’s a pleasure to be here and to be a part of this important conversation about the role of innovation in North Carolina’s future growth and prosperity. Of course, as you all know, innovation is an elusive concept, and no less elusive is what we can do to create more of it. But I do believe we can be certain about three things. First, innovation is essential to economic growth. Second, human capital — the knowledge and skills that make people more productive — drives innovation. Finally, innovation in turn affects the return on investment in human capital. These three insights have important implications for our efforts to help individual workers make fruitful investments in their own human capital and to create the skilled workforce our economy requires. Today, I’d like to talk about several key elements in a comprehensive approach to improving human capital investment: providing students with a better understanding of college preparedness; informing them about multiple career and postsecondary education options; and laying the foundation for success with early childhood education. Before I discuss these ideas in more detail, I must note that these are my own views and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 Innovation and Human Capital I started out by saying that innovation is an elusive concept. So what do I mean by innovation? There is a consensus among economists that long-run growth in economic standards of living depends critically on the rate of technological change. Growth occurs not only because we have more people working or more machines (or, in economic terms, more labor and more capital) but also because technological advances make existing workers more productive. Such advances might be entirely new types of machines, such as the steam engine or the transistor, or they might be new techniques for making existing products. In the 1980s, for example, the steel industry was transformed by the introduction of mini-mills, which used scrap instead of iron ore and dramatically lowered the time and cost of producing steel. (As an aside, the first mini-mill was developed by Nucor, whose headquarters are just a few hours south in Charlotte.) The million-dollar question, of course, is how and why do such innovations occur? There are a variety of economic forces and incentives at work, but a large body of research suggests that human capital is an important determinant of long-run growth in productivity. Countries with more initial human capital appear to have a greater capacity to develop new technologies and to copy or adapt technologies developed in other countries. 2 But innovation and human capital also are linked by the fact that new technologies sometimes increase the demand for skilled workers who can operate those technologies, a phenomenon known as “skill-biased technical change.” Because it takes time for people to learn new skills, this increase in demand initially leads to higher wages for skilled workers relative to less-skilled workers. But as the higher wages spur more people to obtain the necessary education, the supply of skilled workers tends to respond to the demand, and the wage differential tends to narrow. Economists Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz have documented this dynamic — the “race between education and technology” — throughout the 20th century in the United States. 2 In the early 1900s, new technologies such as typewriters and adding machines created a new class of white-collar clerical jobs that required a high school education. Because few people had a degree, these jobs paid about twice as much as jobs that did not require a high school degree.3 The response was a dramatic increase in high school graduation rates. Between 1910 and 1940, the number of 19-year-olds in the United States with a diploma increased from 9 percent to 51 percent.4 Over that same time period, the wage premium associated with high school completion collapsed. In the latter half of the 20th century, as the computer revolution took hold, demand for college- educated workers began to rise, and hence their relative wage rates rose as well. As one would expect, there has been an increase in the number of people with a college degree. In 2013, about 29 percent of adults over age 25 had at least a bachelor’s degree; in 1980, that number was only 17 percent. 5 And yet, the “college premium” has continued to increase: In 1980, the average worker with a college degree or higher earned about 40 percent more than the average worker with only a high school diploma. In 2013, the college-educated worker earned over 80 percent more. 6 The inescapable conclusion is that we are failing to keep pace with our economy’s growing demand for skilled workers. This has implications not only for our ability to develop and implement new technologies but also for the distribution of income in our society. Recent data on economic inequality and economic mobility show that inequality has increased in recent years, while mobility has either decreased or remained flat. In other words, the rich are increasingly likely to remain rich and the poor are increasingly likely to remain poor. Many factors contribute to inequality and the persistence of that inequality both within and across generations. But the growing disparity in the acquisition of skills, often in the form of college education, appears to play a significant role. Preparing a Skilled Workforce You don’t need to be an economist to be concerned that we are not adequately preparing the next generation of workers. Nationwide, about 20 percent of high school students fail to graduate within four years, and there are significant disparities in graduation rates between white students and black or Hispanic students, and between students from high-income and low-income families. In some large urban school districts, as many as 40 percent of students do not graduate in four years. A growing share of those who do complete high school now go on to college. But far too many of these students fail to earn a degree: Nationally, the college dropout rate is around 40 percent. 7 3 The benefits of attending college for a few semesters without graduating are relatively small. The unemployment rate for workers with some college education but no degree is comparable to the rate for workers with only a high school degree. And while students who have attended some college do earn on average about 15 percent more than high school graduates, this pales in comparison with the average earnings of those who have completed bachelor’s degrees. There is also substantial anecdotal evidence that employers are having difficulty finding workers with the right skills. This is a common refrain on our visits to communities throughout the region, and it’s supported by employer surveys. For example, 75 percent of manufacturers reported a moderate to severe shortage of skilled workers, such as welders, who must have strong math skills and be able to read blueprints. 8 There is an ongoing debate among researchers about the actual amount of “skill mismatch” in the labor market,9 but many employers certainly seem to perceive that such mismatch is real. The key question is what can we do to increase the supply of skilled workers? The large increase in the college premium has led many policymakers and educators to advocate college for all. But as the high college dropout rate indicates, there is a big difference between enrolling in college and graduating. During focus group meetings held recently in Virginia by the Richmond Fed, representatives from four-year colleges and community colleges shared that many students are surprised to discover they lack the basic math skills necessary for college-level work. If students overestimate their readiness for college, they may be more likely to enroll in college but then drop out after they get there. That can be a costly lesson to learn; the average debt burden among college dropouts who took out loans is more than $14,000. 10 The high college dropout rate thus suggests that many students could benefit from more information about what is required for college success. Of course, it’s not enough to simply prescribe what students need to know; we must also help them learn it. This points to the value of improving the effectiveness of the K-12 portion of our education system. While that subject is beyond the scope of this talk, I applaud the ongoing efforts here in North Carolina and across the country to increase student achievement and close the gaps between students of different backgrounds. I also believe we should supplement information about college preparedness with information about other career and postsecondary education options. Community colleges, for example, are a venue where students can learn more about their interests and aptitudes and hone the skills that are required for success at four-year schools. Moreover, there are a range of other post-high- school educational institutions that can help students acquire the skills they need to succeed without a college degree. One factor in the high school dropout rate may be the increasing focus of many high schools on college preparation. Some students, however, may not wish to attend college or may see large barriers to doing so. If these students believe that the only reason to complete high school is to attend college, they might not see much value in doing what’s required to graduate. Learning about alternative career and educational opportunities that also require a high school degree could increase the perceived value of high school completion and improve their labor market outcomes relative to dropping out. 11 4 On the other hand, we can do more to ensure that well-qualified students don’t forgo college because of perceived obstacles such as cost or because of social norms that cause them to underestimate the potential benefits or their likelihoods of success. Researchers have found that providing these students with targeted information and assistance — a fairly low-cost intervention — can increase their matriculation rates and can play an important role in changing the beliefs of students who erroneously think they’re not college material. 12 So far I have discussed ways to increase cognitive skills, the specific things we learn through formal education or on-the-job training. But non-cognitive skills such as patience, work ethic and following directions also are critical. These are the skills that make it possible for us to acquire more-complex cognitive skills, and they also are critical for success in the labor market. For example, during our focus group meetings, high school teachers and administrators shared that many students did not know how to self-direct or self-motivate, skills that are critical for college success. Workforce development professionals we spoke with reported that a lack of “soft skills” was a major obstacle to employment for their adult clients. We also hear from the employers who participate in our industry roundtables that many job applicants are lacking in soft skills. How does one acquire these non-cognitive skills? Led by the work of Nobel laureate James Heckman, many economists and other social science researchers have come to a consensus that the foundation is laid very early in life, and that it can be difficult for children who fall behind to catch up. Skill gaps are evident as early as age 5 and tend to persist into adulthood.13 The importance of early skill development also means that the return on a dollar invested in early childhood education can be much higher than the return on a dollar invested later in life. High- quality early childhood education thus should be a crucial — and cost -effective — e lement of a comprehensive strategy to improve human capital investment. The Costs of Innovation Before I conclude, I should acknowledge that while the benefits of innovation are numerous, there are costs for some individuals. Steel mini-mills were a great advance, for example, but they also contributed to the demise of former giants such as Bethlehem Steel, which in its heyday employed nearly 300,000 people in the United States. North Carolina is no stranger to this tradeoff. For decades, people and communities throughout the state depended on furniture and textile manufacturing to provide well-paying jobs, but advances in global transportation and shipping facilitated the movement of much of that activity overseas. And while there has been a resurgence in manufacturing in the state, the new advanced manufacturing techniques require far fewer workers. Today, there are only about half as many people employed in manufacturing in North Carolina as there were in 1990, even though the value of the goods produced has increased — a story that is true nationwide as well. More broadly, while technological innovation may increase the demand for some types of workers, it often reduces the demand for others — even, sometimes, for skilled workers, as occurred during the 1800s when new production techniques displaced glassblowers, shoemakers, bakers and other artisans. 14 More recently, computers have not been a boon for everyone. Many lower-skilled workers have been replaced by machines, and an increasing number of middle-skill workers, such as tax preparers and paralegals, also are vulnerable to automation. 5 But the technological displacement of workers has been part and parcel of rising living standards for centuries. In 1900, more than 40 percent of the U.S. workforce worked in agriculture; today, that number is less than 2 percent. Just as technology reduced the need for farm labor, it also allowed the creation of new jobs in new sectors, and I don’t think any of us would argue that we would be better off if nearly half our population was employed to supply our caloric needs, rather than being free to work as engineers or truck drivers or nurses. We must understand the needs of the workers who are displaced and recognize that adjusting to evolving circumstances takes time, but history provides good reason to be optimistic that the changes wrought by technological innovation ultimately yield broadly shared gains. Conclusion To sum up, innovation is the primary driver of economic growth, and human capital is essential for innovation to occur. At the same time, technological advances also change the skills demanded by our economy. In recent decades, innovation has tilted demand toward more-skilled workers, and these trends seem likely to continue. An increasingly better-educated workforce thus will be essential to the long-term prosperity of a region or a nation. A comprehensive approach to supporting human capital investment — one that focuses on the full range of educational stages and options — can help provide our citizens with the skills they need to share in that prosperity. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, Kartik Athreya, Jamie Feik, Ann Macheras and Urvi Neelakantan for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, The Race Between Education and Technology , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008. 3 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, “Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of Secondary Schooling in America,” NBER Working Paper no. 6439, March 1998; Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, 1995, “The Decline of Non-competing Groups: Changes in the Premium to Education, 1890 to 1940,” NBER Working Paper no. 5202, August 1995. 4 Claudia Goldin, “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History, June 1998, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 345-374. 5 The 1980 Census reported the share of people who had completed at least four years of college. 6 Based on median weekly earnings as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 7 The National Center for Education Statistics defines college completion as earning a bachelor’s degree within six years of matriculating. Graduation rates are calculated according to where students started as full -time, first-time students. Transfer students and students who return to college after an absence are not included. 8 Accenture and The Manufacturing Institute, 2014 Manufacturing Skills and Training Study , January 2015. 9 For example, see R. Jason Faberman and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Is There a Skills Mismatch in the Labor Market?” Chicago Fed Letter no. 300, July 2012. 10 See Christopher Avery and Sarah Turner, "Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too Much—Or Not Enough?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2012, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 165-192. 11 See Julie Berry Cullen, Steven D. Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoff, " What Can Be Done to Improve Struggling High Schools?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2013, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 133-152. 12 For example, see Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner, "Informing Students about Their College Options: A Proposal for Broadening the Expanding College Opportunities Project ," Hamilton Project Discussion Paper, June 2013; and Scott E. Carrell and Bruce Sacerdote, "Late Interventions Matter Too: The Case of College Coaching New Hampshire ," NBER Working Paper no. 19031, May 2013. 13 James Heckman, “Schools, Skills, and Synapses,” Economic Inquiry, July 2008, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 289-324. 6 14 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1998, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 693-732.
