, which implicates a more complicated set of issues around legal authorities and institutional capacities for prudential regulation of markets, as well as firms. But it would be preferable to confront these issues now, before too much of this migration has occurred, than to wait until the problem manifests itself in growing systemic risk. Conclusion The five propositions I have laid out this afternoon are generally intended to outline the contours of a macroprudential approach to the regulation and supervision of large financial institutions, not to identify or elaborate specific policies. But I will close by saying that specific policies to counteract the structural vulnerabilities created by short-term wholesale funding are a priority, not just for the stability of our large prudentially regulated institutions, but for the financial system as a whole. A macroprudential reorientation of our bank regulatory policies will require a range of continuing work on resiliency, on other structural measures, and on the effective blending of macroprudential with traditional microprudential regulatory and supervisory policies. But, even as we make more progress in these areas, our efforts will not be complete without measures addressing what I have termed an accelerant of systemic problems. 1. Thus, for example, fiscal or tax policies would not be generally characterized as macroprudential tools, even though they could have implications for systemic risk in some circumstances. For useful overviews of macroprudential policy issues and debates, see International Monetary Fund (2011), " Macroprudential Policy: An Organizing Framework (PDF) ," (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March 14); Gabriele Galati and Richhild Moessner (2011), " Macroprudential policy--a literature review (PDF) ," BIS Working Paper No. 337 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, February). Return to text 2. For a recent study finding a correlation between the growth of credit aggregates and financial crises, and also suggesting a secular trend making such crises more of a risk, see Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), " Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008 ," American Economic Review , vol. 102 (2), pp 1029-61. Return to text 3. There is actually quite a rich history of policy measures in the United States that we would today call "macroprudential." See Douglas J. Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013), " The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May). It is notable that the enactment and use of a number of tools waned as the integration of capital markets with traditional lending functions accelerated in the last quarter of the 20 th century, though even if there is a causal relationship between these two phenomenon, it is not clear which way the causality runs (perhaps in both directions). Return to text 4. The terminology may differ among commentators. For example, "cross-sectional" is sometimes used in place of interconnectedness, a term that may have some appeal to the extent it moves away from the traditional domino image of one failing firm knocking down another, and also embraces dynamics such as contagion across the financial system arising from correlated asset holdings and sources of funding. Return to text 5. Piet Clement (2010), " The term 'macroprudential': origins and evolution (PDF) ," BIS Quarterly Review (March), pp. 2-3. Return to text 6. The establishment of federal deposit insurance and the separation of commercial banking from investment banking--two key elements of New Deal financial reforms--were very much directed at what would today be characterized as systemic risks. Return to text 7. Andrew D. Crockett, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum (2000), " Marrying the Micro- and Macro-Prudential Dimensions of Financial Stability (PDF) ," speech delivered at the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors in Basel, Switzerland, September 21. Return to text 8. Reading between the lines, one wonders whether Sir Andrew anticipated that his call for action might not be taken up by banking regulators. He styled his remarks as "provocative" and concluded by suggesting they were but "a small awareness-raising step in what, if pursued, is likely to be a long road." Return to text 9. Crockett, 2000 speech: "A review of the instances of financial instability would reveal some shared stylised elements. There is first an over-extension phase during which financial imbalances build up, accompanied by benign economic conditions. In this phase, asset prices are buoyant and their surge tends to feed, and be fed by, rapid credit expansion, domestically or internationally. Leverage, in overt or hidden forms, accumulates in balance sheets, masked in part by the favourable asset price developments. The trigger for a reversal is essentially unpredictable. It can originate either in the financial sphere (e.g., an asset price correction) or in the real economy (e.g., a spontaneous unwinding of an investment boom). The process then moves into reverse. Ex post, a financial cycle is evident." Return to text 10. Elsewhere I have discussed this emphasis at some length. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Financial Stability Regulation ," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, PA, October 10. Return to text 11. It is important to emphasize here, as we do in our annual capital reviews of large banking organizations, that our supervisory stress testing of all covered firms simultaneously does not supplant the need for firms to develop, and make capital decisions dependent upon, their own stress scenarios that incorporate risks more specific to the activities and portfolios of each firm. That is, the necessary emphasis on macroprudential measures at the present time does not obviate the need for solid microprudentially inspired measures. Return to text 12. For a full explanation of the Board's approach to scenario design, see " Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF) ," Regulation YY--Enhanced Prudential Standards, 12 C.F.R. pt. 252 (2012). See also Nellie Liang (2013), " Implementing Macroprudential Policies (PDF) ," speech delivered at the Conference on Financial Stability Analysis: Using the Tools, Finding the Data, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Office of Financial Research, May 31. Return to text 13. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010), Section 113 (a)(1). Return to text 14. Dodd-Frank Act, Section 165. Return to text 15. For example, if the loss to the financial system from the failure of a systemically important firm would be five times that resulting from failure of the non-systemic firm, then the firm would have to hold additional capital sufficient to make the expected probability of failure one-fifth that of the non-systemic institution. Return to text 16. Among the useful efforts along these lines are a measure of Conditional Value-at-Risk (CoVaR) (see Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2011), " CoVaR (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 348 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September), and a measure of systemic risk based on each firm's contribution to the expected capital shortfall of the entire financial system in a crisis (see Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2011), " Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement ," New York University Working Paper (New York: New York University, June). The concept behind the latter measure is also described in Viral V. Acharya, Christian Brownlees, Farhang Farazmand, and Matthew Richardson (2011), "Measuring Systemic Risk," in Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance (New York: Wiley Publishers), pp. 87–119. Updated systemic risk rankings are maintained by the authors here . A helpful review of the efforts to measure systemic risk is Monica Billio, Mila Getmansky, Andrew W. Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon (2010), " Measuring Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors (PDF) ," MIT Sloan School Working Paper 4774-10 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management, March). Return to text 17. One should note that "time-varying" supervision should not mean excessively procyclical supervision. Return to text 18. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011), " Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient Banks and Banking Systems (PDF) ," (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June), p. 57. Basel III introduced the concept of a capital "buffer" to supplement the long-established concept of minimum capital requirements. In brief, the idea is that a bank's distribution of capital to shareholders or employees will be progressively more restricted as capital levels fall below required buffers, but--unlike the case where capital levels fall below minimum requirements--a bank need not bring its capital levels above the buffer by shedding assets or raising new capital. Basel III introduced a "fixed" capital buffer of 2-1/2 percent of common equity on top of the 4-1/2 percent minimum capital requirement. The countercyclical capital buffer would be placed on top of the fixed buffer. If applied at its maximum 2-1/2 percent amount, the countercyclical buffer would thus require that a bank maintain equity capital of at least 9-1/2 percent of risk-weighted assets in order to remain unencumbered by restrictions on capital distributions. There is a view held by some that large banks would be under considerable market pressure to maintain their capital levels above the 7 percent total minimum requirement and fixed buffer (as well as the added systemic surcharge for those banks subject to it), even in stressed periods. Return to text 19. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011). Return to text 20. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), " Guidance for National Authorities Operating the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF) ," (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December), p. 1. Return to text 21. For a useful discussion of the pros and cons of variants on countercyclical capital buffers, see Douglas J. Elliott (2011), " An Overview of Macroprudential Policy and Countercyclical Capital Requirements ," (Washington: The Brookings Institution, March 10). Return to text 22. A draft policy statement was published even before the April 1, 2013, effective date of the new FPC authority. See Bank of England (2013), " The Financial Policy Committee's powers to supplement capital requirements (PDF) ," (London, U.K.: Bank of England, January). Return to text 23. In 2006, just before the onset of the stresses that eventually led to the financial crisis, the largest U.S. financial firms relied on short-term wholesale funding for about half their total funding needs, and deposits for just over one-third. Today (or, more precisely, as of the end of the second quarter of this year) those proportions are almost exactly reversed. Some of the change is likely due to changes in risk assessment and supervisory expectations.But it is also true that deposits were a safe haven for many households and non-household investors during the crisis. It may be that, as financial and economic conditions continue to normalize, households and other investors will move more deposits into other investment vehicles. Return to text 24. Included in this grouping are repo, reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. Return to text 25. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., May 3. Return to text Last Update: September 20, 2013 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Conference, "Planning for the Orderly Resolution of a Global Systemically Important Bank", Washington, D.C. Share Observing the five-year anniversaries of various key moments in the financial crisis throughout 2013 cannot but prompt us to step back and evaluate the effectiveness of the regulatory reform efforts that followed. This week, which marks five years since the U.S. government launched the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), is a particularly appropriate moment to hold this conference on the resolution of systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). The TARP's extension of unprecedented capital support to many of the largest U.S. banks reflected the view of government officials that the failure of these firms would have posed a grave threat to the financial system. The turmoil that followed the failure of Lehman and the decision to rescue AIG each, in their way, underscored the absence of a third alternative to the options of bailout or disruptive bankruptcy. The creation of such an alternative, included as the Orderly Liquidation Authority in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, was a key part of the reforms. In fact, the emergence of a growing consensus around the key elements of a credible resolution mechanism, and the work to engraft those elements into appropriate statutory and administrative frameworks, is one of the more unheralded--if still in progress--successes of the post-crisis regulatory response. Here in the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has been doing path-breaking work to build out the statutory provisions of the Dodd-Frank orderly liquidation authority. Internationally, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has elaborated a set of principles to guide the development of resolution mechanisms globally. 1 And, throughout both processes, there has been fruitful interaction among the official sector, academics, and market participants. In my remarks this afternoon, I will begin by explaining the purpose and critical features of a special mechanism for resolving large financial firms, especially those of systemic importance. Next, I will explain why the efforts of the FDIC have been so important in developing credibility for the Title II resolution mechanism for systemically important firms and identify some of the important work that remains, not just for the FDIC, but for a range of official sector and private actors, here and abroad. Finally, I will end with a few thoughts on the relationship between resolution mechanisms and the broader regulatory reform agenda we have been pursuing over the past several years. The Purpose and Critical Features of a Special Resolution Mechanism The crisis, and the scope of government support for large banks that it precipitated, spawned an ambitious international regulatory reform agenda directed at the financial stability risks posed by SIFIs. It was recognized that, left unaddressed, the necessary but unpalatable government interventions during the crisis would only further entrench the too-big-to-fail status of systemic financial firms--increasing moral hazard, undermining market discipline, and harming competitive equality among financial institutions of different sizes. Stated most pointedly, then, the purpose of a special resolution mechanism for large financial firms is to prevent future situations in which government officials face the unappealing choice they confronted in 2008, to which I alluded a moment ago. Stated more analytically, a special resolution mechanism is needed to take account of the characteristics of financial markets, and of larger firms operating in those markets, that do not fit easily with normal bankruptcy practice. These characteristics all relate to a basic function of financial intermediaries in providing liquidity to firms and households--whether through maturity transformation, by which banks allow depositors to lend out their savings while maintaining complete liquidity; through market-making, by which dealers provide liquidity to investors in various instruments; or through other forms of intermediation. 2 Precisely because financial intermediaries provide these liquidity services, they are subject to funding strains when customers or counterparties become uncertain of the value of the loans, securities, or other assets held by the intermediaries. Where those assets are opaque--as can be the case, for example, with a portfolio of conventional loans or with securities backed by many loans bundled together from various originators--the incentive to withdraw funding increases, particularly in periods of stress when the value of broadly held asset classes may be at risk of precipitous decline. This familiar dynamic is obviously a potential problem for the intermediary. It becomes a problem for society when one or both of two things follow: First, as in the classic case of bank runs, problems at one bank lead depositors or counterparties at other banks to withdraw their own funds, fearing that their own banks may have similar difficulties repaying them because they hold similar assets. Or, second, the liquidity squeeze leads a sizeable financial firm to engage in a fire sale of its assets in order to raise the funds necessary to compensate for the disruption of its normal funding channels. Dumping a sizeable book of assets on the market, in turn, can lead to the adverse feedback loop observed during the crisis: Downward pressure is placed on similar assets held by others, thereby accelerating margin calls on leveraged actors and amplifying mark-to-market losses for all holders of the assets, thereby prompting fire sales by others. In either or both of these eventualities, the potential insolvency of the financial firm is a problem not just for shareholders, employees, and creditors, but for the financial system as a whole. A final point is that a financial firm, through the operation of one or both of these dynamics, can shift from viable to non-viable in quite a short period of time. And, once the confidence of counterparties and customers is shaken, and funding withdrawn, the game is essentially over. Of course, matters are made worse if the firm did not maintain adequate capital levels or relied too heavily on short-term funding, as was the case with many of the firms that failed or came under severe pressure in 2008. However, it is important to note that the nature of financial intermediaries means that even firms compliant with more rigorous capital and liquidity requirements could be faced with these dynamics in a tail event. To be credible, then, a resolution mechanism for large financial firms must be capable of dealing with these characteristics of financial markets. This is the premise underlying Title II of Dodd-Frank, and I think it has also been the premise of thoughtful commentators who have proposed amendments to the Bankruptcy Code for application to large financial firms. 3 There are three key features of Title II and, modified in certain respects, some of these Bankruptcy Code proposals reflect recognition of the peculiarities of financial markets in a way the current Bankruptcy Code does not. The first key feature of Title II, simply put, is speed. It is vital that a resolving authority be able to move very quickly from non-resolution to resolution status, while maintaining continuity of operations. As many of you will recall, during the financial crisis the makeshift arrangements crafted by governments in an effort to avoid large negative effects on financial markets were usually completed over a weekend. The second key feature is a source of immediate funding to continue essential functions and minimize the kind of fire sales referred to earlier. The Bankruptcy Code allows for so-called debtor-in-possession (DIP) financing to be provided to any firm going through the bankruptcy process. 4 Such DIP financing is often essential to maximize the going-concern value of the firm. For a failed SIFI, such funding may be required quickly and in fairly large sums--needs that may not be fully met by private lenders, at least not in the immediate aftermath of a firm being placed into the Title II process. For these reasons, funding from the FDIC, drawing on a line from Treasury, is available under Title II. It is important to note, though, that the underlying concept has the same roots as DIP financing--lending that will maintain or increase the going-concern value of the firm, not absorb losses. It is not a capital injection and does not put taxpayers at risk. The FDIC has indicated that it will, in order to protect taxpayers more fully, require that the financing be collateralized and if, for any reason, the FDIC cannot recover the full amount of credit extended, the shortfall is to be made up by a tax on other large financial firms. The third necessary feature is a temporary stay of close-out rights of qualified financial contract counterparties. The ability of the FDIC, subject to important creditor safeguards, to nullify the direct- and cross-default rights of counterparties can halt the disruptive, uncertainty-driven race to seize and liquidate a firm's assets immediately upon its entrance into a Title II resolution. The FDIC authority includes the opportunity to decide whether it wants to transfer qualified financial contracts (QFCs) to a bridge financial company or another solvent company during a one-day statutory stay of the contractual rights of counterparties of the firm being resolved. As I will discuss later, this authority is not without limitations, particularly in a cross-border resolution, but it is a critical tool for an effective resolution of a financial firm with complex portfolios of financial contracts. While Title II establishes a special resolution mechanism and grants the FDIC powers responsive to the special challenges posed by the failure of large financial institutions, it provides only a legal framework, not an elaborated description of how these powers would be used to resolve a systemically important financial firm. Moreover, the very large financial firms that are the most likely subjects of a Title II proceeding have extensive cross-border activities, and thus implicate the legal systems of other countries. Thus, for orderly liquidation authority to be effective in containing too-big-to-fail concerns and supporting financial stability, the statutory provisions must be supplemented with administrative planning by the FDIC and with consistent measures in other jurisdictions. Developing a Clear, Credible Approach to Resolution It is important to develop and articulate a credible approach to such a resolution proceeding, for at least two reasons. First, unless creditors and counterparties have well-grounded expectations as to how they will be treated in a resolution setting, they may need to charge a premium to compensate for the additional uncertainty associated with the disposition of their claims, which can lead to a mispricing of risks. In some cases, particularly in periods of increasing stress in the financial system, they may be unwilling to deal with certain firms altogether. Parties who have short-term lending to, or contractual arrangements with, these firms may "run" as those loans or contracts lapse, thereby potentially crippling the ongoing business of the firm and creating adverse effects in other parts of the financial system. A second reason is, in some sense, the converse of the first. If creditors and counterparties do not believe the FDIC can successfully resolve the firm, they may not price in the potential for losses that should be incorporated in their dealings with large firms. That is, if investors and other market actors think the prospects for orderly resolution seem low, they may assume the firm will be rescued by the government, and any moral hazard present in these markets will continue. By specifying which financial obligations will be maintained and where the FDIC will look to impose losses, a well-developed approach to resolution can create incentives for private action compatible with the overall aims of systemic firm resolution. The FDIC has made great progress in implementing Title II, in particular by developing the single-point-of-entry approach to resolution of a systemic financial firm. Under the single-point-of-entry approach, the FDIC will be appointed receiver of only the top-tier parent holding company of the failed firm. After the parent holding company is placed into receivership, the FDIC will transfer assets of the parent company to a bridge holding company. The firm's operating subsidiaries (foreign and domestic) will remain open for business as usual. To the extent necessary, the FDIC will then use available parent holding company assets to recapitalize the firm's critical operating subsidiaries. Equity claims of the failed parent company's shareholders will effectively be wiped out, and claims of its unsecured debtholders will be written down as necessary to reflect any losses or other resolution costs in the receivership. The FDIC will ultimately exchange the remaining claims of unsecured creditors of the parent for equity or debt claims of the bridge holding company and return the restructured firm back to private sector control. This conceptual approach to resolution under Title II represents an important step toward ending the market perception that any U.S. financial firm is too big or too complex to be allowed to fail. 5 The aim of the single-point-of-entry approach is to stabilize the failed firm quickly, in order to mitigate the negative impact on the U.S. financial system, and to do so without supporting the firm's equity holders and other capital liabilities holders or exposing U.S. taxpayers to losses. The single-point-of-entry approach offers the best potential for the orderly resolution of a systemic financial firm under Title II, in part because of its potential to mitigate run risks and credibly impose losses on parent holding company creditors and, thereby, to enhance market discipline. In the United States, the top-tier parent company of a large banking firm generally is not an operating company but a holding company, whose primary purpose is to raise capital and direct the operations of its subsidiaries. Its assets largely consist of cash, liquid securities, and equity and debt interests in its subsidiaries. This common organizational feature of U.S. banking firms facilitates the single-point-of-entry approach because the liabilities of the top-tier holding company are structurally subordinated to the customer obligations and other direct liabilities at the firm's operating subsidiaries. Accordingly, under the single-point-of-entry approach, the equity and debt at the holding company level can form a buffer that must first be exhausted before any customer or creditor of a subsidiary suffers losses. The existence of this buffer should help give the customers and creditors of a U.S. banking firm greater clarity regarding their potential loss exposure in failure. The presumption that holding company capital liabilities would be required in the first instance to absorb losses in a systemic financial firm will be critical in maintaining the confidence, and limiting the run potential, of customers, liquidity providers, and other creditors at the operating subsidiary level. The single-point-of-entry approach does not involve a government guarantee that subsidizes systemic financial firms by protecting their investors from downside risk. The resolution would result in a recapitalization of a failed firm by the firm's own investors. Any protection received by the creditors of a failed firm's operating subsidiaries would be provided by the equity and debt holders of the failed firm's parent holding company. And even if any temporary losses were suffered by the government because of its provision of liquidity, Dodd-Frank requires that the government be reimbursed through assessments on large financial firms. The work being done by the FDIC in building out its approach to Title II will continue, and the FDIC has indicated that it will explain this thinking in further detail in a public release later this year. In addition to the FDIC's work, there are other ways that the credibility of Title II can be enhanced. For example, the Federal Reserve and the FDIC can use their joint responsibility for overseeing the resolution plans, which are required by Dodd-Frank, for large, prudentially regulated firms to improve the resolvability of systemically important financial institutions. 6 The largest U.S. bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations submitted their first annual resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC in 2012 and have recently submitted a second round of resolution plans. These plans have yielded valuable information that is being used to identify, assess, and mitigate key challenges to resolvability under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code and to support the FDIC's development of backup resolution plans under Title II. We expect the second round of submissions to include improvements that address the initial set of obstacles to resolvability identified during the first round. More broadly, our evaluation of the resolvability of these large firms has been further advanced by the resolution planning process. Let me mention two ways in which the organizational structure of systemic financial firms could be shaped so as to facilitate the single-point-of-entry approach. One would be to ensure that losses at material operating subsidiaries, including in material foreign subsidiaries, could be transferred to the parent holding company in resolution. The other would be to keep the firm's parent holding company non-operational and otherwise "clean" through limits on the issuance of short-term debt and on the conduct of material business operations in the parent holding company. The single-point-of-entry approach concentrates losses on the creditors and counterparties of the SIFI parent, as opposed to the operating subsidiaries. Accordingly, the impending failure of a SIFI would create strong incentives for creditors and counterparties of the parent holding company to run. 7 The single-point-of-entry strategy will be more credible and effective if the only creditors of the parent holding company are holders of capital instruments, and long-term debt holders are fully aware they are subject to bail-in as part of any Title II resolution. Another way to enhance the credibility of the FDIC's approach is to require adequate loss-absorbing capacity within large financial firms. Minimum capital requirements, conceptually, are designed to cover losses up to a certain statistical probability. If an extreme tail event occurs and the equity of the firm is wiped out, successful resolution without taxpayer assistance would be most effectively accomplished if a firm had sufficient long-term, unsecured debt to absorb additional losses and to recapitalize the business transferred to the bridge operating company. The presence of this debt explicitly identified for possible bail-in on a "gone concern" basis should help other creditors clarify their positions in the orderly liquidation process. A requirement for long-term debt could also have the benefit of improving market discipline, since holders of that debt would know they faced the prospect of loss should the firm enter resolution and would presumably demand an appropriate risk premium. The Federal Reserve, in consultation with the FDIC, will be issuing in the next few months a proposal that would require the largest, most complex banking firms to hold minimum amounts of long-term, unsecured debt at the holding company level. This requirement will have the effect of preventing erosion of the current long-term debt holdings of the largest, most complex U.S. firms, which, by historical standards, are currently at fairly high levels. Absent a minimum requirement of this sort, one could expect declines in these levels as the quite flat yield curve of recent years steepens; indeed, we have recently seen some evidence of the beginnings of such declines. At the international level, the FSB has recently announced that it will be issuing proposals for global standards on gone-concern loss absorbency for global systemically important financial institutions. 8 The single-point-of-entry approach will also be facilitated by the presence of a sufficient amount of assets of the right types at the SIFI parent to enable the recapitalization of its material operating subsidiaries when losses have eroded the capital of the subsidiaries. The write-down of equity and the imposition of haircuts on parent holding company debt in Title II does not by itself recapitalize the operating subsidiaries. Moreover, foreign operations of a SIFI are more likely to be ring-fenced or wound down separately under the insolvency laws of their host countries if foreign authorities or directors do not have full confidence that local interests would be protected. A requirement that a SIFI's parent holding company hold minimum amounts of "internal bail-in" debt issued by its material operating subsidiaries could offer a solution to this problem: A failed SIFI parent holding company would be able to inject capital into its material operating subsidiaries by effectively converting that intra-group debt into equity. Cross-Border Issues In many ways, Title II has become a model resolution regime for the international community. In 2011, the FSB adopted the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions , a new standard for resolution regimes for systemic firms. 9 The core features of this global standard were already embodied in Title II. By acting early, through the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the United States led the way in shaping the development of international policy for effective resolution regimes for systemic financial firms. The FDIC's work on the single-point-of-entry approach continues to help frame the terms of international discussions at the FSB. Moreover, as the home-country supervisor of eight of the 28 global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) identified by the FSB, the Federal Reserve has responsibility for establishing and routinely convening for each U.S. G-SIB a crisis management group. 10 These firm-specific crisis management groups, which are comprised primarily of the firm's prudential supervisors and resolution authorities in the United States and key foreign jurisdictions, are working to mitigate potential cross-border obstacles to an orderly resolution of the firms. All that said, many other major jurisdictions have not yet enacted legislation that would create a statutory resolution regime with the powers and safeguards necessary to meet the FSB's Key Attributes . Mitigating the obstacles to SIFI resolution will require, at a minimum, that key foreign jurisdictions implement national resolution regimes consistent with the Key Attributes . While compatible host-country resolution regimes are necessary for orderly cross-border resolutions, they may not be sufficient. Most importantly, home-country resolution of a global systemic financial firm may be nearly as difficult if creditors and counterparties of the firm's foreign operations run as will likely happen if domestic creditors and counterparties do so. Possibilities for such runs may be reduced by well-developed and transparent arrangements for cooperation between home- and host-country officials in resolving these firms. The recent joint paper by the FDIC and Bank of England is an important example of such cooperation. 11 But, standing alone, even the best of cooperative arrangements may not remove all salient obstacles. One key challenge is that certain Title II stabilization mechanisms, including the one-day stay provision with respect to over-the-counter derivatives and certain other financial contracts, may not apply outside the United States. Accordingly, counterparties to financial contracts with the foreign subsidiaries and branches of a U.S. firm may have contractual rights and substantial economic incentives to terminate their transactions as soon as the U.S. parent enters into resolution. Equivalent opportunities and incentives may apply to counterparties of U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations. One approach to addressing this problem would be for domestic legislatures to amend bankruptcy and insolvency laws to recognize stays imposed in home-country resolution procedures consistent with international standards. However, it may be difficult to get such legal changes on roughly comparable terms in all relevant jurisdictions, much less to conclude a binding international agreement along those lines. A second approach, currently under consideration by regulators, would be to seek modifications to standard contractual cross-default, netting, and related practices. This approach would use contractual measures to achieve the same end of having these arrangements effectively governed by resolution decisions in home countries. Of course, even if agreement were reached among regulators, in consultation with relevant industry associations, and effective steps were taken to implement that agreement, it could take some time for the new terms to be widely adopted in relevant markets. But a regulatory timeline could be set to speed up the process. This approach may be the most promising for tackling this vexing problem. Resolution and Regulation The resolution mechanism created by Title II of Dodd-Frank is gaining greater operational credibility as the FDIC builds out its single-point-of-entry approach. With each rule, policy statement, cross-border agreement, and firm-specific resolution plan, that credibility is further increased. Additional measures such as those I have suggested today will continue to enhance this third option of orderly resolution, and relieve government officials of the Hobson's choice of bailout or disruptive bankruptcy for systemically important financial firms. However, as is apparent from the amount of work and planning involved in this effort--particularly, though not exclusively, on cross-border matters--the construction of a resolution framework remains an ongoing challenge. Moreover, even when a large, complex firm can be resolved at no cost to taxpayers without provoking a systemic crisis, there will very likely still be significant negative externalities in the financial system. That is, even if a firm is not too-big-to-fail, it may still be of sufficient systemic importance to make its failure a costly event. Thus, even as policymakers strive to increase prospects for orderly resolution, we must continue efforts to reduce prospects for the failure of a systemically important firm that would require this special mechanism. Stronger capital and liquidity requirements that improve going-concern resiliency will remain crucial to a reform agenda directed at containing the too-big-to-fail problem. The objectives of preventing failure and of reducing systemic costs in the event failure nonetheless occurs are complementary, rather than alternative, policy aims. The most important systemic vulnerabilities that have not been subject to sufficient regulatory reforms are those created in short-term wholesale funding markets. In the recent financial crisis, severe repercussions were felt throughout the financial system as short-term wholesale lending against all but the very safest collateral froze up. Although short-term wholesale funding levels at major U.S. and foreign banking firms are lower than they were at the outset of the crisis, major global banks remain significant users. High levels of such funding increase the probability of severe funding problems at, and thus the failure of, major financial firms. They also complicate the orderly resolution of major financial firms in the event of failure. 12 Indeed, precisely because an effective orderly resolution mechanism provides for continued funding of certain short-term creditors to staunch potentially calamitous runs, that type of funding will not be subject to the increased market discipline resulting from the creation of a credible resolution process. This fact only strengthens the case for measures to limit the potential of short-term wholesale funding to be an accelerant of systemic problems. Conclusion As I stated at the outset, I believe that creation of the orderly liquidation authority in Title II of Dodd-Frank, the work of the FDIC in developing that authority, the international consensus on the need for similar authority in relevant jurisdictions, and the continuing dialogue with academic and policy commentators together constitute a relatively unnoticed success in the world of financial regulatory reform. This observation has come with two, probably predictable caveats. First, considerable work remains, so as to continue building and communicating a credible resolution mechanism that will allow investors, creditors, and counterparties of large financial firms to form reasonable expectations as to how a resolution would be conducted. Second, while it is important to have such a mechanism as part of an overall program to confine too-big-to-fail problems, it would not be desirable to have to use it. The more desirable outcome would be for its very credibility to work in concert with capital, liquidity, and other applicable regulations to reduce the chances of its actual utilization. These two thoughts bring me to a final point. As I mentioned, serious work is being done by various commentators on proposals to adapt the Bankruptcy Code to the salient differences between financial and most other industries. As I have watched the back-and-forth between those in the official sector charged with developing orderly resolution mechanisms and those working on bankruptcy amendment proposals, I have noted each side taking account of some points in favor of the other side's model, with attendant modifications in everyone's thinking. Differences remain, to be sure, such as the tradeoff between, on the one hand, a bankruptcy model's reliance on the independence of the judiciary and the accumulated precedent for dealing with creditors' claims and, on the other, the advantages in the Title II model of speed, pre-existing knowledge of financial firms, and a systemic perspective. But there has also been productive convergence. I join those who believe that the best outcome may be an amended Bankruptcy Code co-existing with Title II, with the former the default route in the case of a large financial firm's insolvency, and the latter available for the unusual moment when systemic risks loom large. The adaptation of the Bankruptcy Code to deal with large, but not necessarily systemic, financial firms would itself be an important step forward. And the existence of two options other than bailout or disruptive bankruptcy would be welcome to anyone who remembers the position of policymakers in the fall of 2008. 1. In November 2011, the Financial Stability Board adopted Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions (PDF) , a new international standard that sets out the core elements of an effective special resolution regime for systemically significant financial firms. Return to text 2. The long-standing special resolution powers of the FDIC for insured depository institutions, on which Title II was in part modeled, themselves reflect some relevant peculiarities of banking, and financial markets more generally, compared to other industries. Return to text 3. See, e.g., John F. Bovenzi, Randall D. Guynn, and Thomas H. Jackson (2013), " Too Big to Fail: The Path to a Solution ," Bipartisan Policy Center: Washington, D.C., May, and Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor, eds. (2012), Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14 (Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press). Of particular interest in Scott and Taylor is the careful analysis by Professor Thomas Jackson in presenting a proposal for a new Chapter 14 of the Bankruptcy Code. Id. at pp. 25–70. Return to text 4. When a firm is continuing operations under the reorganization provisions of Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, or even doing so temporarily under the liquidation provisions of Chapter 7, it may, without court approval, incur unsecured debts for which creditors have priority over other unsecured lenders for normal operational expenses; with the approval of the court, the firm may also incur debt for other expenses. As explained above, repayment of some existing short-term creditors may be necessary to maintain the value of a financial firm, something not generally considered a normal operating expense of the sort for which DIP financing is routinely available under current bankruptcy law. Return to text 5. It is worth noting that the Resolution Project at the Hoover Institution, which produced the proposal for a special Bankruptcy Code Chapter 14 cited in footnote 3, is now at work on a variant of its proposal that builds specifically on the single-point-of-entry approach. Return to text 6. Dodd-Frank Section 165(d), 12 U.S.C. §5365(d). Resolution plans are also required of non-bank financial firms designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council as of systemic importance and thereby subject to supervision by the Federal Reserve. These plans are also useful supervisory tools that have helped the Federal Reserve and the firms focus on opportunities to simplify corporate structures and improve management systems in ways that will help the firms be more resilient and efficient, as well as easier to resolve. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve issued supervisory guidance relating to operational resilience, including supervisory expectations regarding collateral management; payment, clearing, and settlement activities; liquidity and funding; management information systems; and shared and outsourced services. This guidance was informed by the cross-firm comparative review of the first round of resolution plans and reflected initial supervisory judgments of those practices and capabilities necessary to support effective recovery and resolution planning efforts. Going forward, supervisory assessments will require firms to demonstrate their capabilities in these areas. The resolution planning process has been designed to be iterative; there is still much work to be done in this area by firms, domestic and foreign supervisors, and national governments. Return to text 7. Although long-term debtholders of a troubled SIFI parent will be contractually unable to run, a SIFI parent with sizeable amounts of short-term debt could face substantial runs in times of stress. The contagion could spread to short-term creditors of other SIFI holding companies. Return to text 8. Financial Stability Board (2013), Progress and Next Steps Towards Ending "Too-Big-To-Fail" (TBTF): Report of the Financial Stability Board to the G-20 (PDF) . Return to text 9. Financial Stability Board (2011), Ibid . 1 Return to text 10. Financial Stability Board (November 2012), " Update of group of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) (PDF) " . Return to text 11. FDIC and Bank of England (December 2012), Resolving Globally Active, Systemically Important, Financial Institutions: A joint paper by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Bank of England (PDF) . Return to text 12. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 3. Return to text Last Update: October 18, 2013 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Americans for Financial Reform and Economic Policy Institute Conference, Washington, D.C. Share As illustrated, quite literally, by a chart that New York Fed staff produced a few years ago, the term "shadow banking system" encompasses a wide variety of institutions that engage in credit intermediation and maturity transformation outside the insured depository system. 1 In my remarks today, I want to concentrate on short-term wholesale funding and, especially, the pre-crisis explosion in the creation of assets that were thought to be "cash equivalents." Such assets were held by a range of highly risk-averse investors, who were in many cases not fully cognizant that the "cash equivalents" in their portfolios were liabilities of shadow banks--the institutions depicted in the memorable graphic. In some cases, the perception of claims on shadow banks as cash equivalents was based on explicit or implicit promises by regulated institutions to provide liquidity and credit support to such entities. In other cases, the perception came about because market participants viewed the instruments held on the balance sheets of shadow banking entities--notably highly rated, asset-backed securities--as liquid and safe. While reliance on private mechanisms to create seemingly riskless assets was sustainable in relatively calm years, the stress that marked the onset of the financial crisis reminded investors that claims on the shadow banking system could pose far more risk than deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Once reminded of their potential exposure, investors engaged in broad-based and sometimes disorderly flight from the shadow banking system. This experience of the run on the shadow banking system that occurred in 2007 and 2008 reminds us that similar disorderly flights of uninsured deposits from banks lay at the heart of the financial panics that afflicted the nation in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The most dramatic of these episodes were the bank runs of the early 1930s that culminated in the bank holiday in 1933. Just as it was necessary, though not sufficient, to alter the environment that led to those successive deposit runs by introducing deposit insurance in order to create a stable financial system in the early-twentieth century, today it is necessary, though not sufficient, to alter the environment that can lead to short-term wholesale funding runs in order to create a stable financial system for the early twenty-first century. As I will describe in a few moments, the Federal Reserve has taken some steps toward this end over the past few years. However, as I will also contend, completion of this task will require a more comprehensive set of measures, at least some of which must cover financial actors not subject to prudential regulatory oversight. Before turning to these points, I want to develop briefly the comparison between deposit runs of the pre-FDIC period and contemporary short-term wholesale funding runs in order better to explain the nature of the regulatory challenge. Vulnerabilities Created by Short-Term Wholesale Funding There are notable similarities between the bank runs that periodically afflicted the U.S. banking system before the creation of federal deposit insurance and the dramatic short-term wholesale funding runs that began in 2007. Each had a cascading, self-reinforcing quality, fueled by questions concerning the solvency of borrowing entities--whether deposit-taking banks or dealers seeking credit in repo markets. And, in each case, the opaqueness of the balance sheets of the borrowing entities led lenders to fear that an institution holding assets similar to, or interconnected through counterparty relationships with, another, troubled institution might itself be in trouble. Significantly, though, in each case, at least some of the lending actors were interested not just in eventually recovering the full amount of the funds they had extended, but in having access to those funds more or less immediately. Some depositors in 1932 needed their money in order to meet the requirements of daily life, while many repo counterparties in 2008 needed their money to meet other short-term obligations. Thus the issue was not just a matter of solvency--whether the firm would ultimately be able to pay all the claims even after the run--but also a matter of the short-term liquidity of the bank or broker. The dynamic unleashed by short-term wholesale funding runs in 2007 and 2008 directly exacerbated financial stress. Many assets funded through the shadow banking system were traded assets, which could be liquidated rapidly, though often at distressed prices, to reduce the funding needs of the borrowing firms. The resulting fire sales recalled the asset liquidations by some trust companies during the Panic of 1907 and by some securities firms in the 1930s. In 2008, these fire sales created adverse feedback loops of mark-to-market losses, margin calls, and further liquidations. The unwinding of the risk illusion--that is, the assumption that lending to shadow banks was essentially risk-free--helped transform a dramatic correction in real estate valuations into a crisis that engulfed the entire economy. But for a few idiosyncratic instances since the introduction of deposit insurance in 1933, bank runs have been rendered a thing of the past. Deposits below the amount of the federal insurance cap are fully and explicitly guaranteed. Access to the Federal Reserve's discount window for depository institutions complements the deposit insurance system by helping to relieve liquidity pressures in solvent banks. In practice, failing banks usually merge into healthier ones, so that depositors do not lose access to their funds and deposits exceeding the amount of the federal insurance cap are effectively protected. In the relatively few instances of depositor payouts, the FDIC has reimbursed depositors expeditiously. Of course, the explicit and de facto extension of federal guarantees created moral hazard problems, which the safety-and-soundness regulation of insured depository institutions was strengthened to address. The similarities between deposit runs and short-term wholesale funding runs have suggested to some that the policy responses should also be similar. Those taking this position argue for providing discount window access to broker-dealers, guaranteeing certain kinds of wholesale funding, or both. Others, myself included, are wary of any such extension of the government safety net and would prefer a regulatory approach that requires market actors using or extending short-term wholesale funding to internalize the social costs of those forms of funding. Unlike deposit insurance, the savings of most U.S. households are generally not directly at risk in short-term wholesale funding arrangements. And, also unlike insured deposits, there is an argument in the short-term wholesale funding context that counterparties should be capable of providing some market discipline in at least some of the contexts in which such funding is provided. In thinking about how to regulate shadow banking, we must be mindful that it is not really a single system. It is immeasurably more complicated than the bank deposit system of either the 1930s or today. Even with the reduction in activity following the crisis, the scale of shadow banking activity remains very large. Banks and broker-dealers currently borrow about $1.6 trillion, much of this from money market funds and securities lenders, through tri-party repos, leaving aside additional funds sourced from asset managers and other investors through other channels. 2 The banks and broker dealers, in turn, use reverse repo to provide more than $1 trillion in financing to prime brokerage and other clients. While the volume of this activity has fallen considerably since the crisis and the haircuts and other conditions associated with current securities financing transactions are considerably more conservative than during the pre-crisis period, there is every reason to believe that the amount of this activity could increase, and the conservatism of the terms of the lending could be eroded, as economic conditions improve. Let me turn now to some of the specific vulnerabilities, steps that have been taken thus far to address these vulnerabilities, and the work that remains. Regulated Institutions and Shadow Banking While the term "shadow banking" implies activity outside the purview of regulatory oversight, regulated institutions are in fact heavily involved in these activities, both in funding their own operations and in extending credit and liquidity support to shadow banks beyond the regulatory perimeter. Support provided for shadow banking activities may be either explicit or implicit. In some cases, there are explicit contractual provisions for credit enhancements and liquidity support. In other cases, the support is implicit, based on a bank's historical pattern of providing support or a belief among investors that a bank will provide support to maintain the value of its franchise. In the lead-up to the crisis, explicit and implicit commitments by regulated banking firms to shadow banks often combined to create the assumption that the liabilities of such entities were risk-free. This perception led to an underpricing of the risks embedded in these money-like instruments, making them an artificially cheap source of funding and creating an oversupply of these instruments that contributed to systemic risk. Contractually committed credit and liquidity support lends itself more readily to regulation than does implicit support. Basel III reforms have strengthened the regulatory requirements for situations in which there is contractual support for shadow banking activities. For example, the Basel III capital requirements increase from 0 percent to 20 percent the credit conversion factor for commitments with an original maturity of one year or less that are not unconditionally cancellable. In addition, the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) assigns a 100 percent drawdown rate to undrawn amounts of credit and liquidity facilities extended by banks to a special purpose entity (SPE), effectively requiring a bank to hold $100 in high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) for every $100 it commits to a SPE. Implicit support presents more of a regulatory challenge. Identifying implicit forms of support requires a supervisory judgment that, despite sometimes stern warnings in offering documents, a banking organization bears some of the risk associated with that investment. Regulators must decide how much of the risk the banking organization retains and make context-sensitive judgments about the financial stability implications of various remedies. These challenges notwithstanding, regulators have made some progress in addressing instances of implicit support that played a major role in the last crisis. Let me mention two examples. The first involves the implicit support associated with the provision of intraday credit by clearing banks in the tri-party repo market. In a repurchase agreement or "repo," the cash borrower agrees to sell a security to a cash lender, and to repurchase the security from the cash lender at a later date. In a tri-party repo transaction, a clearing bank handles settlements through accounts held at that financial institution by the parties to the transaction. To allow broker-dealers who borrow in the tri-party repo market to have access to their securities for routine trading purposes, the market developed an operational feature known as the "daily unwind." Before the crisis and for some time afterwards, the clearing banks unwound all tri-party repo trades each day--even those with a significant term, which in theory represented longer-term financing commitments--returning securities to borrowers and cash to lenders. However, because the securities still required financing during the day, cash borrowers relied on uncommitted secured credit, backed by their overall portfolio of securities and provided by the clearing bank. Transactions were re-wound at the end of the day, with specific securities allocated as collateral to each lender at that time. Cash lenders in the tri-party repo market thus came to expect that the two clearing banks would always unwind their maturing trades in the morning, returning cash to their account, despite the absence of a contractual provision requiring them to do so. As a result, they grew comfortable in the belief that they held a cash-equivalent asset that was perfectly safe and liquid. But as the crisis deepened, cash lenders became aware of the fact that the clearing banks were not contractually obligated to unwind repo trades and that the dealers that were the primary borrowers in the tri-party repo market could fail, leaving lenders with collateral that they had little or no capacity to manage at a juncture when its value and liquidity was open to doubt. This resulted in several distinct episodes during the crisis when cash lenders, despite holding collateral, quickly withdrew financing from dealers perceived to be facing potential financial distress. The tri-party repo market might have suffered a full-scale run in the absence of public-sector intervention. Since the crisis, the Federal Reserve has led an effort to reduce reliance on intraday credit in the tri-party repo market. Work to date has reduced the amount of intraday credit provided by the clearing banks from 100 percent of the tri-party repo market to approximately 30 percent, and commitments by market participants suggest that this amount will fall to 10 percent by the end of next year. This operational change, in addition to enhancing the resiliency of the settlement process, should help limit the likelihood that tri-party repo lenders return to believing that lending in the tri-party repo market is a risk-free proposition. As a result, tri-party repo lenders are likely to conduct more thorough due diligence on their counterparties and exercise more care in considering the types of collateral that they will lend against than was the case before the crisis. 3 The second example involves the implicit support provided by bank sponsors of certain securitization SPEs. Before the crisis, the interplay between bank capital requirements and accounting rules created a significant incentive for banks to shift assets off-balance sheet through the use of various SPEs. Under the capital requirements that applied at the time, a bank that sold assets to a conduit or other SPE it sponsored was required to hold capital only against its contractual exposure to the SPE. Yet because a bank that failed to support SPEs it sponsored might irreparably damage the value of its franchise, banks often provided credit and liquidity support in excess of contractually obligated amounts to asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) programs, credit card securitizations, and other structured finance vehicles. Recognizing this incentive, pre-crisis lenders were willing to hold commercial paper and other liabilities issued by bank-sponsored SPEs at yields only slightly higher than those on liabilities issued directly by the bank. In effect, the bank was able to hold less capital and reduce its funding costs without decreasing its economic exposure. Post-crisis reforms have reduced the opportunity for banks to exploit this regulatory arbitrage. In 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) adopted FAS 166 and 167 to modify the accounting treatment of structured finance transactions involving certain SPEs. Under the new accounting guidance, a company is required to consolidate those SPEs for which the company has the power to direct matters that most significantly impact the entity as well as the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits. Securitization sponsors have generally interpreted the new guidance as requiring a sponsor to consolidate a SPE under circumstances in which the sponsor retains loan-servicing obligations and exposure to the equity tranche of the securitization. Following the publication of FAS 166 and 167, the federal banking agencies adopted new rules requiring banking organizations to hold risk-based and leverage capital against assets of the newly consolidated SPEs. 4 These rules eliminated a provision in the bank capital requirements that permitted a banking organization to exclude from the calculation of its risk-weighted assets the assets of an ABCP program that the banking organization sponsored and was required to consolidate. As a result, bank sponsors of ABCP conduits and certain other securitizations must now hold levels of regulatory capital commensurate with the exposure arising from the implicit support they provide. Collateralized Borrowing Arrangements and Financial Stability Turning now to financial stability concerns raised by short-term wholesale funding more generally, I want to focus on collateralized borrowing arrangements. These collateralized borrowing arrangements consist largely of securities financing transactions (SFTs), a term that generally refers to repo and reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. Lenders are willing to extend credit on a secured basis because these transactions are usually short-term, over-collateralized, backed by reasonably liquid securities, subject to daily mark-to-market and re-margining requirements, and exempt from the automatic stay in insolvency proceedings. In the most common practice, a broker-dealer uses SFTs to finance either securities inventory or a back-to-back SFT loan to another financial firm (SFT matched book). The financial stability risks associated with a dealer's use of short-term SFT funding to finance its inventory are relatively straightforward. If a broker-dealer loses access to financing and is forced to sell securities at a depressed price, fire sale externalities may result because other market participants may be less able to borrow against the same securities. And if the broker-dealer fails due to runs by short-term SFT lenders, post-default fire sales by the firm's creditors or contagious runs on other financial intermediaries may ensue. Because broker-dealers generally do not internalize the externalities that arise in these cases, they may use more than the economically efficient level of short-term funding. The financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books are somewhat less obvious. Even if the outflows and inflows associated with a dealer's SFT positions are perfectly maturity-matched, reputational considerations may inhibit a dealer from reducing the amount of SFT credit that it provides its customers, exposing the dealer to considerable liquidity stress. If the dealer does reduce the amount of credit that it provides to its customers, those customers may be forced to engage in asset fire sales of their own. Particularly in situations in which the customers are highly leveraged, maturity-transforming entities that lack access to a liquidity provider of last resort may pose a significant risk of contagion. Post-crisis financial regulatory reform has taken some steps to address the financial stability risks associated with a dealer's use of short-term SFT funding to finance inventory. For example, the liquidity coverage ratio requires firms to hold a buffer of high-quality liquid assets when they use SFT liabilities that mature in less than 30 days to fund many types of securities. New risk-based capital rules have substantially increased the amount of capital that dealers are required to hold against assets in the trading book. But these reforms are limited: The LCR does not require firms to hold any liquidity buffer against SFT liabilities that mature in more than 30 days or that are backed by very liquid assets. There continues to be a need for standardized capital requirements for market risk to back up model-derived risk weights. Moreover, the current regulatory framework does not impose any meaningful regulatory charge on the financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books. The Basel III risk-based capital rules require banking organizations to hold relatively little capital against SFT assets, which are assumed to pose little microprudential risk. Because leverage requirements do not take into account the fact that SFTs are collateralized transactions, leverage requirements have the potential to impose higher charges on SFT assets. But leverage requirements have traditionally been calibrated at non-binding levels and, to the extent they do bind in the future, are unlikely to bind evenly across firms. As a result, the leverage ratio may simply cause SFT assets and liabilities to migrate to those firms with stronger leverage ratios. Similarly, the LCR and, at least at this stage of its development, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), both assume that a firm with a perfectly matched book is in a stable position. The LCR assumes a bank can call in reverse repos and other SFT assets that mature in less than 30 days or reuse the collateral that secures those assets for purposes of its own borrowing. Thus, reverse repos and other SFT assets generally are treated as completely liquid instruments. Under the initial version of the NSFR, firms would not need to hold any stable funding against reverse repos, securities borrowing receivables, or other loans to financial entities that mature in less than one year. Again, this may be a reasonable position from a microprudential perspective, geared toward more or less normal times. But here is where we need an explicitly macroprudential perspective that forces firms to internalize the tail-event financial stability risks associated with SFT matched books. Policy Options There are two kinds of policy options that can be considered, individually or together, in responding to the financial stability vulnerabilities inherent in firms with large amounts of short-term wholesale funding--whether loaned, borrowed, or both. The first would impose a regulatory charge calculated by reference to reliance on SFTs and other forms of short-term wholesale funding, whether the firm uses that funding to finance inventory or an SFT matched book. The second would directly increase the very low charges under current and pending regulatory standards attracted by SFT matched books. Among the first set of options, the idea that seems most promising is to tie capital and liquidity standards together by requiring higher levels of capital for large firms that substantially rely on short-term wholesale funding. The additional capital requirement would be calculated by reference to a definition of short-term wholesale funding, such as total liabilities minus regulatory capital, insured deposits, and obligations with a remaining maturity of greater than a specified term. There might be a kind of weighting system to take account of the specific risk characteristics of different forms of funding. The capital requirement would then be added to the Tier 1 common equity requirement already mandated by the minimum capital, capital conservation buffer, and globally systemic bank surcharge standards. However, this component of the Tier 1 common equity requirement would be calculated by reference to the liability side, rather than the asset side, of the firm's balance sheet. The rationale behind this policy option is that, while solid requirements are needed for both capital and liquidity, the relationship between the two also matters. For example, a firm with little reliance on short-term funding is less susceptible to runs and, thus, to the need for engaging in fire sales that can depress capital levels. A capital surcharge based on short-term wholesale funding usage would add an incentive to use more stable funding and, where a firm concluded that higher levels of such funding were nonetheless economically sensible, the surcharge would increase the loss absorbency of the firm. Such a requirement would be consistent with, though distinct from, the long-term debt requirement that the Federal Reserve Board will be proposing to enhance prospects for resolving large firms without taxpayer assistance. The second kind of policy option is to address head-on the macroprudential concerns arising from large matched books of securities financing transactions. A capital surcharge is in some respects an indirect response to the problem of short-term wholesale funding runs and, as earlier noted, current versions of capital and liquidity standards do not deal with matched book issues. One might choose either to increase capital charges applicable to SFT assets or to modify liquidity standards so as to require firms with large amounts of these assets to hold larger liquidity buffers or to maintain more stable funding structures. It is not clear how much appetite there may be internationally for revisiting agreements that have been completed, such as the LCR and the Basel III capital rules. However, with the NSFR still under discussion, and with the Basel Committee in the process of reconsidering the standardized banking book risk weights and capital regulations associated with traded assets, there are opportunities to pursue these options. Requirements building on any of the foregoing options would by definition be directly applicable only to firms already within the perimeter of prudential regulation. The obvious questions are whether these firms at present occupy enough of the market that standards applicable only to them would be reasonably effective in addressing systemic risk and, even if that question is answered affirmatively, whether the imposition of such standards would lead to a significant arbitrage through increased participation by those outside the regulatory perimeter. It does not seem far-fetched to think that, with time and sufficient economic incentive, the financial, technological, and regulatory barriers to the disintermediation of prudentially regulated dealers could be overcome. Indeed, there have already been reports of some hedge funds exploring the possibility of disintermediating dealers by lending cash against securities collateral to other market participants. For this reason, there is a need to supplement prudential bank regulation with a third set of policy options in the form of regulatory tools that can be applied on a market-wide basis. That is, regulation would focus on particular kinds of transactions, rather than just the nature of the firm engaging in the transactions. To date, over-the-counter derivatives reform is the primary example of a post-crisis effort at market-wide regulation. 5 Given that the 2007–2008 financial crisis was driven more by disruptions in the SFT markets than by disruptions in the over-the-counter derivative markets, comparable attention to SFT markets is surely needed. Over the past two years, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has been evaluating proposals for a system of haircuts and margin requirements for SFTs. In its broadest form, a system of numerical floors for SFT haircuts would require any entity that wants to borrow against any security to post a minimum amount of excess margin that would vary depending on the asset class of the collateral. Like minimum margin requirements for derivatives, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would be intended to serve as a mechanism for limiting the build up of leverage at the security level, and could mitigate the risk of procyclical margin calls. In August, the FSB released a proposal that would represent a first step in the direction of such a framework. However the FSB's proposal has some significant limitations. First, with respect to counterparty scope, the FSB's proposal would apply only to SFTs in which regulated entities provide financing to unregulated entities; the proposal would not cover SFTs between a regulated lender and a regulated borrower, between an unregulated lender and a regulated borrower, or between an unregulated lender and an unregulated borrower. Second, the proposal would apply only to lending against collateral other than sovereign obligations. And finally, with respect to calibration, the FSB's proposed numerical floors are set at relatively low levels--levels that are, for example, significantly below the haircuts that currently prevail in the tri-party repo market. An alternative to the FSB's proposal would be to apply a system of numerical floors to SFTs regardless of the identity of the parties to the transaction. Such an approach would at least partially offset the incentive that will otherwise exist to move more securities financing activity completely into the shadows. Regarding calibration, there are at least three conceptually plausible bases for setting the level of the numerical floors above the low backstop levels contemplated in the current FSB proposal. One approach would be to base the calibration of the numerical floors on current repo market haircuts. These haircuts have increased significantly compared to pre-crisis levels. Establishing numerical floors at around current levels could prevent the return of a less prudent set of practices as memories of the crisis fade. A second approach would be to set haircuts for a given asset class based on asset price volatility or haircut levels observed during times of stress or long-term periods that include times of stress. While minimum haircut levels should not be set as high as the haircuts lenders demanded at the depths of the crisis, setting numerical floors in proportion to those levels might be reasonable. A third alternative would be to set numerical floors for SFT haircuts at levels that are commensurate with the amount of capital a banking organization would need to hold against the security if it held the security in inventory. Such an approach could be viewed as an indirect way of extending bank capital requirements to the shadow banking system, and would reduce the current bank regulatory incentive to lend against a security rather than hold it directly. Finally, it is worth noting that, while a framework of universal margin requirements for SFTs could not be evaded through the disintermediation of regulated entities, it might be evaded through the use of alternative transactional structures. If margin requirements for cash SFT transactions are significantly higher than margin requirements for creating the same economic exposures using synthetic SFT transactions, a framework of minimum margins for SFTs could push market participants to rely more heavily on derivatives that are the functional equivalent of cash SFTs. Moreover, market participants might attempt to arbitrage margin floors through arrangements whereby the lender effectively lends the SFT borrower the minimum excess margin amount. These and similar issues will need to be addressed as options for minimum margins are further developed. Conclusion If we think back to the rapid growth of the shadow banking system in the pre-crisis period, we are reminded of some glaring vulnerabilities: Large firms that could themselves be considered shadow banks and that relied on the shadow banking system for a significant proportion of their funding--a group that included the "free-standing" investment banks--were outside the perimeter of prudential regulation. The breaking of the buck by the Reserve Primary Fund following Lehman's collapse triggered a run on the shadow banking system that required unprecedented support by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve. The process established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for designation of systemically important non-bank firms has provided a means for ensuring that the perimeter of prudential regulation can be extended as appropriate to cover large shadow banking institutions. The proposals of the Securities and Exchange Commission on money market fund regulation are a response to continuing vulnerabilities as well as to the run in the fall of 2008. These are important initiatives that will contribute to a safer system of funding throughout the financial system. Yet the risk of contagious runs would persist even in the absence of individually systemic institutions. And with less vulnerable money market funds, other cash-rich entities could emerge as a source of inexpensive funding for the shadow banking system. Finally, as I have noted, the systemic risks associated with short-term wholesale funding in prudentially regulated institutions have not fully been countered by the important capital and liquidity standards adopted since the crisis. My purpose today has been to reinforce the point that a sounder, more stable financial system requires a more comprehensive reform agenda. 1. See Zoltan Pozsar, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky (2010), " Shadow Banking (PDF) ," Staff Report No. 458 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July). Return to text 2. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, " Tri-Party Repo Statistics as of 10/09/2013 (PDF) ," Tri-Party Statistical Data file. Return to text 3. This work is explained on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2010), " Agencies Issue Final Rule for Regulatory Capital Standards Related to Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167 ," press release, January 21. Return to text 5. Although the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission primary responsibility in this area, a broad range of federal financial regulators (including the Federal Reserve) is responsible for developing margin requirements for over-the-counter derivatives transactions. These requirements will limit the amount of leverage that market participants can take on through the use of derivative instruments. In addition, by requiring margin to be posted at the outset of a transaction and mark-to-market gains and losses to be continually offset through transfers of additional collateral, these requirements will help to avoid situations in which firms face margin calls only when they are most pressed for liquidity. Return to text Last Update: November 22, 2013 Back to Top
