An Update on the Economy and the Main Street Lending Program By Eric S. Rosengren June 19, 2020 Webinar Greater Providence Chamber of Commerce Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Key Takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s June 19 Remarks Takeaway: Ongoing public health concerns have created an unusually complex employment situation, with U.S. unemployment at 13.3 percent, up dramatically from February in all age cohorts. But a return to work by more people is good news only if can be done safely and on a sustained basis. Excerpt: “If workplaces reopen without the necessary health precautions, the recent increases in payroll employment could be offset by possible business closures and serious health outcomes later. … If reopening can be done in ways that protect public health, then better outcomes now will also translate to better outcomes in the future.” Takeaway: The economic rebound in the second half of the year is likely to be less than what was hoped for at the outset of the pandemic, due to the continued community spread of COVID-19 and the acceleration of new cases in many states. In addition, more fiscal and monetary policy support will likely be needed. Excerpt: "I expect the unemployment rate to still be at double-digit levels at the end of the year, given what are likely to be persistent economic headwinds from the pandemic over the second half of the year. And my own more pessimistic forecast does not fully incorporate the challenges of a second wave of the virus. Takeaway: The economic toll of the virus is closely tied to how well the U.S. can get the public health pandemic under control, but efforts to date have not been particularly successful. A more rapid and complete economic recovery requires better ability to contain the pandemic. Excerpt: “If there are significant flare-ups in states that have aggressively reopened, the reduction in social distancing that contributes to stronger economic performance in such states now may translate to more depressed economic activity and increased public health issues in those states in the future. … Given the death toll of the virus even with the economic lockdown, I see a substantial risk in reopening too fast and relaxing social distancing too much.” Takeaway: In two of the past three recessions, lending conditions tightened significantly and restricted the supply of credit. The Federal Reserve created the Main Street Lending Program to facilitate the flow of credit to small to medium-sized businesses. Excerpt: “The Fed will participate in the lending by purchasing a 95 percent interest in the loan. … By purchasing this percentage of the loans, the Federal Reserve will take on most of the risk that would otherwise need to be absorbed solely by lenders, and will create additional balance sheet capacity for lenders to extend more loans at this challenging time for our country’s economy.” Takeaway: Recent changes to the Main Street Lending Program made it even more widely attractive for more borrowers, allowing more small and medium-sized business to receive loans. Excerpt: “Our hope is that this program will, over time, provide an important source of liquidity for small and medium-sized businesses that might otherwise not receive credit on the same terms. In addition, it provides an important backstop should the pandemic be more severe than anticipated this fall.” Takeaway: The Main Street Lending Program is off to a positive start. The registration and verification process for possible lenders in the program opened on Monday, and as of Thursday, more than 200 financial institutions, large and small, had initiated registration. Excerpt: “These are still early days in the program, and we are seeing a steady stream of interest … We encourage lenders who have not yet registered to explore the program. … Lenders have a vested interest in the resilience of the businesses in their market, and this program gives them a way to help bridge those businesses that were sound before the pandemic to better days.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords COVID-19 , Pandemic , Public Health , fiscal policy , monetary policy , employment , Main Street Lending Program

The COVID-19 Pandemic, the Economic Outlook, and the Main Street Lending Program By Eric S. Rosengren August 12, 2020 Webinar South Shore Chamber of Commerce Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Key Takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s Aug. 12 Remarks Takeaway: The path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. So, limited or inconsistent efforts by states to control the virus are not only placing citizens at health risk, but are also likely to prolong the economic downturn. Excerpt: “As long as the virus poses significant threats to public health, a full economic recovery will be very difficult as individuals, often voluntarily, avoid activities that place their health at risk. […] Indeed, the trajectory of the economic recovery will be determined more by the path of the virus than by the path of policymaking, although monetary and fiscal policy can mitigate, and have mitigated, some of the most significant adverse impacts.” Takeaway: Despite sizeable interventions by monetary and fiscal policymakers, the economic data indicate that the recovery may be losing steam, as activities in many states are once again restricted, officially or voluntarily, to slow the virus’s spread. Excerpt: “The forecast for this fall is quite uncertain, but my view is that the recent slowdown in economic activity…is likely to continue. Currently, we have an unemployment rate above 10 percent, and because of the continued community spread of the virus, I am concerned that the pandemic will limit the ability of the economy to recover quickly.” Takeaway: States that re-opened early saw a temporary economic benefit, but that gain has been short-lived and came at a cost – including rising rates of infections, which have resulted in less spending more recently. Excerpt: “Lifting restrictions too quickly hurt both the economy and public health down the road. In the Northeast, where restrictions were more substantial and lasted longer, states are now experiencing both better public health outcomes and more spending in sectors of the economy that are sensitive to social distancing.” Takeaway: While both Europe and the U.S. had significant increases in infection rates in the spring, Europe enacted more stringent and longer-term shutdowns and limits, and did not reopen until the virus had reached low levels. Their infection rates fell faster and further, and have remained relatively low, and economic activity has been more robust. Excerpt: “In contrast, in the United States, infection rates remain elevated, as states lifted protective measures too soon and in a manner not calibrated for the true risks posed by the virus.” Takeaway: Credit interruptions prolong recessions and harm individuals and businesses, so it is important that the Fed stands ready, with the Main Street Lending Program, to facilitate credit flows that can bridge businesses and nonprofits of many sizes, at reasonable rates. Excerpt: “The program is attractively structured for many facing cash-flow interruptions due to the pandemic, facilitating 5-year loans with no payment of interest in the first year and no payment of principal until the third year. It is attractive for lenders because they can meet the credit needs in their markets while retaining only 5 percent of the loan on their books, with the Federal Reserve taking a 95 percent participation interest in the loan. […] The Fed is aiming to help [entities] that … given the uncertain outlook, might otherwise have difficulty in obtaining credit from a lender that would have to hold 100 percent of the loan. The Main Street program can provide essential financing to help these entities avoid shutting their doors and permanently laying off their employees.” Takeaway: Some suggest that the Main Street program’s modest initial activity is evidence of failure, but Rosengren disagrees completely. The Program is one important way the Fed is doing all it can to support the businesses, nonprofits, and individuals that make up our nation’s economy. Excerpt: “The numbers seem consistent with a gradual pace of initial activity that is more recently expanding as participants become familiar with the program parameters. […] Loans are contracts between borrowers and banks, and the negotiations for loans can take some time and effort. […] As borrowers and banks have become more familiar with the program, we have seen a steady increase in loans submitted to our portal. There are currently more than $856 million in loans active, with more than $250 million in loans committed or settled. Much of the increase has occurred recently, and I expect we will continue to see more.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords Economic outlook , Main Street Lending Program , Pandemic , COVID-19 , Economic recovery
