Governor Lael Brainard At "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Share I want to compliment the organizers and others for gathering an outstanding group of researchers and papers for this conference. Understanding why some groups persistently fare better than others in the job market and how these disparities may affect the economy's overall performance is vitally important to the Federal Reserve. While opportunity and inclusion have long been central to American values, it is increasingly clear that they are also central to the strength of our economy. 1 As directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable." 2 Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment. The recognition that maximum employment evolves over time to reflect changes in the economic landscape serves us well by requiring FOMC participants to develop a nuanced understanding of labor market developments. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards. This is especially true at a time when the traditional Phillips curve relationship is flatter than in the past, which means that price inflation is likely to be less informative regarding labor market tightness than it was previously. 3 It therefore seems particularly valuable to look beyond inflation and headline unemployment to assess the strength of the labor market. Even when aggregate economic statistics look strong, studying geographic areas and demographic groups that are not faring as well can point to ways of further improving the economy's performance. The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy. When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation. At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity. More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future. With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means. There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity. Large disparities in opportunity based on race, ethnicity, gender, or geography mean that the enterprise, exertion, and investments of households and businesses from different groups are not rewarded commensurately. To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain. 4 Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States. The gaps in household income and wealth between the richest and poorest households are at historically high levels, as income and wealth have increasingly accrued to the very richest households. For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988. The share of wealth held by the top 1 percent rose to 39 percent in 2016, up from 30 percent in 1989. 5 Some research suggests that widening income and wealth inequality may damp consumer spending in the aggregate, as the wealthiest households are likely to save a much larger proportion of any additional income they earn relative to households in lower income groups that are likely to spend a higher proportion on goods and services. 6 Disparities by Race and Ethnicity When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities. 7 In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups. As shown in figure 1 , unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans. Labor force participation rates, shown in figure 2 , also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent. These differences are not a recent development--similar differences across racial and ethnic dimensions have existed for as long as these data have been collected. Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels. 8 Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades. Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s. Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites. Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further. 9 More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth. According to forthcoming findings from the latest SCF and as shown in figure 3 , the average income for white families in 2015 was about $123,000 per year, compared with $54,000 for black families and $57,000 for Hispanic families. 10 Disparities in wealth, shown in figure 4 , are even larger: Average wealth holdings for white families in 2016 were about $933,000, compared with $191,000 for Hispanic families and $138,000 for black families. 11 Moreover, these racial and ethnic gaps in average family income and wealth have generally widened rather than narrowed over the past few decades. Based on SCF data, median family wealth has grown much more rapidly for white families than for other families over the past few decades, while median family incomes have risen by about the same amount for white, black, and Hispanic families. As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue. That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural. After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities. 12 While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. Geographic Disparities The Federal Reserve System benefits not only from our engagement with research, statistics, and surveys, but also from our presence in communities all across America. This local presence, by design, provides valuable perspectives on how Americans in different communities are experiencing the economy and the varied challenges that lie beneath the aggregate numbers. While traveling around the country with our community development staff, I have been struck by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas. The statistics bear this out. Over the past 30 years, the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically. 13 Much of the gains in employment, income, and wealth since the end of the recession, and more broadly over the past few decades, have accrued to workers and families in larger cities. Since some workers and families may find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the growth capacity of the economy as a whole. Although pockets of opportunity and poverty are found in large metropolitan and rural areas alike, a greater share of the new jobs and business establishments created during the recovery that followed the Great Recession have been in larger metro areas than was the case in previous recoveries. 14 In countless rural towns and small cities we are seeing how a deep economic setback can leave a profound and long-lasting mark. These experiences challenge common assumptions about the ability of local economies to recover from a setback. This could be the legacy of the concentrated presence of an industry that experiences decline due to trade or technology, or it could be the byproduct of a lack of connectivity--whether by highways or broadband. Technological change, globalization, and other shifts in demand and costs are not new to the U.S. economy, but there are troubling signs that less diversified or connected localities have a diminished ability to adapt. And the evidence suggests that concentrated economic shocks and the associated labor market stress also have broader consequences for health and mortality. 15 To provide some sense of the magnitudes, on average over the past year the unemployment rate for adults of prime working age (25 to 54) was about 1 percentage point higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in larger metro areas. 16 But there is an even greater gap in labor force engagement, as can be seen in figure 5 . The participation rate for prime-age adults in larger metro areas is currently nearly 3‑1/2 percentage points above the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas. Interestingly, the geographic participation rate gap between more and less populous areas is apparent for all races as well as, in recent years, for both men and women. 17 This gap in labor force participation between large cities and other areas has widened substantially since just before the Great Recession: Since 2007, the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas has fallen nearly 3 percentage points, as compared with less than 1 percentage point on net in larger metro areas. Indeed, since 2007, the large decline in labor force participation in small metro and rural areas can explain about 40 percent of the economy-wide decline in prime-age labor force participation, even though these areas account for a smaller 25 percent of the population. Before discussing possible contributors to this growing participation gap, it is important to emphasize that less populous areas appear to be falling behind in ways beyond these employment outcomes. Based on forthcoming SCF data, for example, the average annual income for families in metro areas was about $54,000 higher than for families in nonmetro areas, and the average wealth holdings for families in metro areas exceeded average wealth for families in nonmetro areas by nearly $500,000--and these gaps have more than doubled over the past three decades. 18 i The gaps in many other measures of well-being have widened as well. In small towns and rural areas, college attainment rates have increased by less, disability rates have increased by more, divorce rates have risen by more, and mortality due to lung disease, cancer, or cardiovascular disease have either improved by less or worsened by more. 19 Opioid use is also most prevalent in less populous metro and rural areas. 20 I have seen many of these challenges first hand. In the small towns and hollers of eastern Kentucky, I visited with community development financial institutions that are trying to plug the gap in access to credit so that small businesses can continue operating and hiring locally, and so that families can access housing that is safe and affordable. In rural communities in the Mississippi Delta, I learned about diminished access to financial services available to rural residents, which can be a barrier to housing and business investment and pose vexing challenges to local governments. In Texas, I learned about barriers to economic development in the rural colonias areas on the southern border associated with underinvestment in physical and broadband infrastructure. 21 As we consider the long-term health of the U.S. economy, it is important to better understand the decade-long decline in aggregate labor force participation. It is striking that in larger metro areas, the labor force participation rate for prime-age men has recently retraced much of the decline experienced during the recession, while in smaller metro and rural areas, the labor force participation rate remains well below its pre-recession level, with only modest improvements of late. The evidence increasingly suggests that much of the decline relates to a sustained decline in job opportunities for prime-age men, especially less-educated prime-age men, resulting in languishing wages relative to other groups. 22 Indeed, it is notable that the striking decrease in labor force participation rates for nonmetro areas relative to large metro areas is highly concentrated among adults with no more than a high school education, who comprise a larger share of the prime-age population in nonmetro areas. The labor force participation rate for adults with no more than a high school education has fallen to 72 percent in nonmetro areas--about 3-1/2 percent below larger metro areas. 23 Although the precise causes of this decline are still not fully settled, one contributing factor is advancing automation and computerization. 24 Another contributor is globalization. For example, a growing body of research has identified a steeper decline in the employment and labor force attachment of prime-age men in areas of the country that specialized in the industries that were most negatively affected by increased imports from China. 25 Research suggests that some of the decline in prime-age labor force participation relates to some individuals' reduced ability or desire to work, in some cases resulting directly from the ongoing decline in job opportunities. There are many reasons why some prime-age men may be less willing or able to work. One possibility is that the unusually long spells of nonemployment associated with the Great Recession may have eroded job skills and informal employment networks. Another possibility that is increasingly in focus is that physical disabilities, as well as sharp increases in opioid use, have increasingly inhibited some individuals from participating in the labor force. The fraction of prime-age men receiving disability insurance benefits has increased from 1 percent in the late 1970s to 3 percent more recently. 26 Recent research also finds that among all prime-age men who are not in the labor force, about one-third reported having at least one disability, and nearly one-half reported taking pain medications daily. 27 These supply-side explanations may be related to the drop in labor demand: the despair related to diminished prospects of a stable and quality job may lead to substance abuse and related health or mortality concerns. 28 At least some of these explanations potentially relate to the growing divide between large metro areas and other areas of the country. As noted earlier, the opioid epidemic appears to be particularly acute in smaller cities and rural areas. In addition, employment in non-metro areas tends to be more concentrated in manufacturing, which is the sector that has experienced the largest decline in employment from automation and globalization. 29 Similarly, research suggests that workers in less populous areas have been more likely to be directly affected by increased import competition from China due to the geographical distribution of industries. 30 And for many less populous areas, job opportunities are less diverse than in bigger cities, so that when a plant shuts down, there are fewer local alternative job opportunities for unemployed workers, especially with comparable levels of employment security or benefits. These striking results naturally raise the question of whether we are seeing heightened migration from the less populous areas to the larger metros with greater economic opportunity. A conventional assumption in economics is that regional differences should narrow over time as workers move toward areas where jobs are more plentiful and wages are higher. 31 In reality, Americans' propensity to move is currently at its lowest level in many decades. In 2016, the fraction of the population that had moved within the United States in the past year was 11 percent, down from 17 percent or more in the early 1980s, with the steepest decline in the fraction of people moving longer distances, across county or state lines. 32 The evidence suggests that the decline in geographic mobility cannot be fully explained by population aging, by the housing boom and bust, by changes in the composition of industries, by the increasing ease of telecommuting from longer distances, or by the rise in dual-earner households which may make work-related relocation more difficult. Some of the decline may be related to changes in the labor market, perhaps because workers are more likely to perceive that job opportunities are no better elsewhere, and consequently that the labor market returns to switching jobs or locations--in terms of better wages or higher job quality--have declined. 33 Also, zoning requirements may be boosting housing costs in cities where job opportunities are most abundant, such as San Francisco, pricing out many potential workers and inhibiting migration. 34 Whatever the reason, the fact that families are less likely to move now than in the past suggests that many of those in less populous areas are not able to access the economic opportunity present in denser and more diversified large metropolitan areas at a time when the gap in labor market outcomes for larger metros relative to other areas continues to grow. Federal Reserve Work on Labor Market Disparities The Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work. One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves. For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups. The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys. 35 Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth. The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement. The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics. The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs. 36 All of that brings me to today's conference, which I am confident will make an important contribution to this mission. I am heartened to see so many researchers and practitioners from a variety of backgrounds focused on these important issues. This conference is part of our efforts to hear from experts with diverse backgrounds and perspectives to better understand the nature and implications of labor market disparities. A deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity. We look forward to hearing what you have to say about these important questions and learning what other questions are in need of attention. References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-255. Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price (2016). "Import Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 34 (part 2, January), S141-98. Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo (2017). " Robots and Jobs: Evidence from U.S. Labor Markets (PDF) ," unpublished paper, March 17. Adamy, Janet, and Paul Overberg (2017). "Rural America is the New 'Inner City'," Wall Street Journal, May 26. Alichi, Ali, Kory Kantenga, and Juan Solè (2016). " Income Polarization in the United States (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper 16/121. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Autor, David (2010). " The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications for Employment and Earnings (PDF) ." Washington: Center for American Progress and Hamilton Project. Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, vol. 103 (October), pp. 1553-97. Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2015). "Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets," Economic Journal, vol. 125 (May), pp. 621-46. Bernstein, Jared (2013). "The Impact of Inequality on Growth." Washington: Center for American Progress. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). " The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF) " Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz (1992). " Regional Evolutions (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 1-75. Brainard, Lael (2015). " Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. Brainard, Lael (2017). " Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter for America's Economic Strength ," speech delivered at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May 22. Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (forthcoming). "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). " Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Case, Anne and Angus Deaton (2015). "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 112 (December), pp. 15078-83. -------- (2017). " Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 397-452. Council of Economic Advisors (2014). " The Labor Force Participation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications (PDF) ." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States. -------- (2016). " The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation (PDF) ." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States. Economic Innovation Group (2016). The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery (PDF) . Washington: EIG, May. Fryer, Jr., Roland G. (2011). "Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4b. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 855‑971. Ganong, Peter, and Daniel W. Shoag (2017). "Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23609. Goetz, Stephen, Mark Partridge, and Heather Stephens (2017). " The Economic Status of Rural America in the Trump Era ," MPRA Paper 77830. Munich: Munich Personal RePEc Archive, March. Guy, Jr., Gery P., Kun Zhang Kun, Michele K. Bohm, Jan Losby, Brian Lewis, Randall Young, Louise B. Murphy, and Deborah Dowell (2017). " Vital Signs: Changes in Opioid Prescribing in the United States, 2006–2015 (PDF) ," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 66 (July 7), pp. 697-704. Herkenhoff, Kyle F., Lee E. Ohanian, and Edward C. Prescott (2017). "Tarnishing the Golden and Empire States: Land-Use Regulations and the U.S. Economic Slowdown." NBER Working Paper No. 23790. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). "Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration," International Economic Review, vol. 58 (February) pp. 57-94. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). " Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Krueger, Alan (forthcoming). "Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity . (The conference draft is available at https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/where-have-all-the-workers-gone-an-inquiry-into-the-decline-of-the-u-s-labor-force-participation-rate .) Marrero, Gustavo, and Juan Rodrìguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith and Abigail Wozniak (2011). "Internal Migration in the United States," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Summer), pp. 173-96. -------- (2017). "Job Changing and the Decline in Long-Distance Migration in the United States," Demography, vol. 54 (April), pp. 631-53. Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott (2016a). "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment," American Economic Review, vol. 106 (July), pp. 1632-62. -------- (2016b). " Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-094. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Ritter, Joseph A., and Lowell J. Taylor (2011). "Racial Disparity in Unemployment," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 93 (February), pp. 30-42. Sampson, Robert J. (2016). " Individual and Community Economic Mobility in the Great Recession Era: The Spatial Foundations of Persistent Inequality (PDF) ," in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds., Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 259-87. Semega, Jessica L., Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar (2017). " Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF) ," Current Population Reports, pp. 60-259. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September, . Weingarden, Alison (2017). " Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). " So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy ," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown," a conference sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5. 1. I am grateful to Christopher Smith for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf . Return to text 3. For more on the Phillips curve and its ability to provide information on labor-market slack, see Brainard (2015), Blanchard (2016), and Kiley (2015). Return to text 4. For more on inequality of opportunity see Marrero and Rodriquez (2013). Return to text 5. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data (to be released on September 27); for additional analysis of these data, see Bricker and others (forthcoming). Return to text 6. See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending. Return to text 7. For a discussion of gender disparities, see Yellen (2015). Return to text 8. See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market. Return to text 9. Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical gaps are provided by Cajner and others (2017). Return to text 10. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data. Recent estimates of household income from Current Population Survey data and reported by the Census in Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar (2017) are qualitatively similar, in that between 2013 and 2016 for both sets of data, family income has increased for whites, blacks, and Hispanics (with greater increases, in percentage terms, for black and Hispanic families). Return to text 11. Racial and ethnic differences in median income and wealth are somewhat smaller. For example, in 2016 median income for white families was about $61,000, compared with $35,000 for black families and $39,000 for Hispanic families. Median wealth was about $171,000 for white families, compared with about $20,000 for black and Hispanic families. The larger gap in average income and wealth than median income and wealth reflects a greater concentration of income and wealth among the wealthiest white families than for other races and ethnicities. Return to text 12. For example, see Fryer (2011) and Ritter and Taylor (2011). Return to text 13. See Ganong and Shoag (2017) and references therein for more on the decline in income convergence. Return to text 14. See Goetz, Partridge, and Stephens (2017) and Economic Innovation Group (2016) for details on growing regional differences during the recovery. Return to text 15. See Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016b). Return to text 16. Larger metro areas are defined as metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) with a population of 500,000 or larger, while smaller metro areas are MSAs with population between 100,000 and 500,000, and nonmetro areas are the remainder; see Weingarden (2017). Return to text 17. This gap appears to be a post-crisis phenomenon for women, while for men the gap began to widen in the 1990s. Return to text 18. Staff estimates from forthcoming SCF data. Although the difference in average income and wealth has grown, there has been little change in differences in median family income and wealth in larger metros relative to other areas. The widening gap for average income and wealth, but not for median income and wealth, is because in larger metro areas income and wealth has become increasingly held by wealthier families. Return to text 19. These statistics are provided in Adamy and Overberg (2017). Return to text 20. See Guy, Jr., and others (2017). Return to text 21. See the Brainard (2017) speech on opportunity and inclusion. Return to text 22. Most analysis suggests that at least half of the decline in the aggregate labor force participation rate since 2007 is attributable to the aging of the population, with a significant portion of the decline that is not related to aging attributable to a longer-run decline in participation for younger individuals and prime-age men; for example, see Aaronson and others (2014) and the Council of Economic Advisors (2014). For an overview of factors potentially attributable to the decline in labor force participation of prime-age men, see the Council of Economic Advisors (2016). Return to text 23. These estimates are based on data from Weingarden (2017). Return to text 24. For an overview of factors that have potentially impacted job opportunities for this group, see Autor (2010). For examples of research on the recent labor market effects of technology and automation, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). Return to text 25. For national-level estimates of the labor market effects from cheaper Chinese imports, see Pierce and Schott (2016a) and Acemoglu and others (2016). For evidence related to cross-country differences in these effects, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), and Pierce and Schott (2016b). Return to text 26. See Council of Economic Advisors (2016). Return to text 27. Krueger (forthcoming) describes evidence from a variety of surveys showing that a significant fraction of prime-age men who are out of the labor force report having pain, being in poor health, or taking medication related to this pain, and that these behaviors are far more common among prime-age men than prime-age women. Return to text 28. See Case and Deaton (2015, 2017). Return to text 29. Based on staff analysis of publically available data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis on metropolitan and nonmetropolitan employment by industry. Return to text 30. This observation reflects unpublished calculations from Pierce and Schott (2016b). Return to text 31. See Blanchard and Katz (1992). Return to text 32. Data on internal migration rates come from the Current Population Survey and are published annually by the Census Bureau; see " Table A-1. Annual Geographic Mobility Rates, by Type of Movement: 1948-2016 ." Return to text 33. For a discussion of the multidecade decline in internal migration and its potential causes, see Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011, 2017) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). Return to text 34. See Ganong and Shoag (2017) and Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Prescott (2017). Return to text 35. Further information on these surveys are found on the Board's website; see the Survey of Consumer Finances ; the Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking ; the Survey of Young Workers ; and the Survey of Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (PDF) . Return to text 36. For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, see https://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute , for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, see https://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp , and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, see https://www.investinwork.org . Return to text i. Note. On September 27, 2017, a typo was corrected to change $25,000 to $54,000 in the following sentence on page 9: "Based on forthcoming SCF data, for example, the average annual income for families in metro areas was about $54,000 higher than for families in nonmetro areas, and the average wealth holdings for families in metro areas exceeded average wealth for families in nonmetro areas by nearly $500,000--and these gaps have more than doubled over the past three decades." The original number incorrectly stated the median instead of the mean. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 26, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minority Bankers," a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Share I would like to thank President George and her staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for inviting me to participate in today's conference, which is a joint effort of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Richmond, and St. Louis as well as the Federal Reserve Board. 1 Diversity in Financial Services As you may know, this is the second minority bankers forum hosted by the Federal Reserve System. Diversity and inclusion are important to the strength of the banking industry, and therefore I am pleased that the Federal Reserve System is sponsoring this conference. Among other benefits, diversity and inclusion strengthen organizations by improving deliberations and decisionmaking. Banks with more diverse workforces are also better able to reach broader groups of customers, especially customers who have historically been underbanked, when they show that serving those customers is a top priority. One of the most effective ways of showing a commitment to a diverse customer base is showing a commitment to a diverse workforce. We now have substantial empirical evidence documenting the benefits of diversity in broadening the range of ideas and perspectives that are brought to bear on solving problems, and thereby contributing to better outcomes, in research, policy, and business. Studies suggest that increased diversity alters group dynamics and decisionmaking in positive ways. Microeconomic experiments and other research have confirmed these ideas. One experiment found that greater racial diversity helped groups of business students outperform other students in solving problems. And another found similar benefits from gender diversity. A study of 2.5 million research papers across the sciences found that those written by ethnically diverse research teams received more citations and had a greater influence than papers by authors with the same ethnicity. 2 As a bank regulator, the Federal Reserve has an interest in promoting diversity in the financial services industry. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is actively engaged in developing diverse talent in the financial services industry as a key partner of the Financial Services Pipeline Initiative (FSP). The FSP is a collaborative of about 20 financial services organizations that are working together to increase the representation of Latinos and African Americans, at all levels, within the Chicago-area financial services industry. The members of this initiative recognize they have a collective interest in developing a diverse pipeline of talent. They are more likely to be more successful in achieving their internal pipeline goals if they succeed in improving diversity and inclusion in the finance workforce more broadly. Another example of our work to promote diversity at banking institutions is the standards developed by the Board's Office of Minority and Women Inclusion to promote transparency and awareness of diversity policies and practices within banking institutions. The Board encourages banking institutions not only to provide their policies, practices, and self-assessment information to the Board, but also to disclose this information to the public. We hope that this new self-assessment tool will help individual banks achieve their own diversity and inclusion goals and contribute to greater diversity in the banking industry more generally. I also want to take this opportunity to update you on what we are doing to preserve and promote Minority Depository Institutions (MDIs). Though I know that only some of you work for MDIs, the Federal Reserve recognizes their vital role in serving low- and moderate-income and minority communities as well as bringing diversity to the field of banking. I make a point of meeting with the leadership of MDIs as I travel around the country so I can hear firsthand about the challenges these institutions face and the important work they are doing to provide financial services to minority and historically underserved populations. I have heard from CEOs of MDIs about how challenging it can be to simultaneously serve their target market and be a bank of choice in a competitive banking market. Some have managed to thread that needle successfully by remaining firmly rooted and accessible in the communities they serve as well as maintaining their focus on trust, loyalty, and personalized relationship banking, which is a particular strength and competitive advantage for MDIs. The Federal Reserve has developed a national outreach program called the Partnership for Progress to assist MDIs in confronting business model challenges, cultivating safe banking practices, and competing more efficiently. Recently, the Board doubled its resources for this program to better support MDIs. We brought to bear the resources of our community development function, which promotes economic growth and financial stability in lower-income communities. Combining the resources of our banking and supervision staff with our community development staff allows us to be more creative in supporting MDIs around the country. Recognizing that there has been a dearth of MDI research in recent decades, last year, for the first time, we commissioned two external researchers to develop papers on MDIs. The resulting new papers, along with another written by economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, were presented at the interagency biennial MDI conference this past April in Los Angeles. We are in the process of commissioning research for next year in an effort to deepen our understanding of these unique institutions. Labor Market Disparities Turning to the workforce more broadly, I want to spend some of my time today talking about disparities and share some findings from a conference we hosted yesterday at the Board titled "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable." 3 Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards. The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy. When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation. At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity. More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future. With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means. 4 There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity. Large disparities in opportunity based on race, ethnicity, gender, or geography mean that the enterprise, exertion, and investments of households and businesses from different groups are not rewarded commensurately. To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain. 5 Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States. The gaps in household income and wealth between the richest and poorest households are at historically high levels, as income and wealth have increasingly accrued to the very richest households. For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988. The share of wealth held by the top 1 percent rose to 39 percent in 2016, up from 30 percent in 1989. 6 Some research suggests that widening income and wealth inequality may damp consumer spending in the aggregate, as the wealthiest households are likely to save a much larger proportion of any additional income they earn relative to households in lower income groups that are likely to spend a higher proportion on goods and services. 7 Disparities by Race and Ethnicity When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities. 8 In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups. As shown in figure 1 , unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans. Labor force participation rates, shown in figure 2 , also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent. These differences are not a recent development--similar differences across racial and ethnic dimensions have existed for as long as these data have been collected. Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels. 9 Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades. Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s. Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites. Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further. 10 More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth. According to forthcoming findings from the latest SCF and as shown in figure 3 , the average income for white families in 2015 was about $123,000 per year, compared with $54,000 for black families and $57,000 for Hispanic families. 11 Disparities in wealth, shown in figure 4 , are even larger: Average wealth holdings for white families in 2016 were about $933,000, compared with $191,000 for Hispanic families and $138,000 for black families. 12 Moreover, these racial and ethnic gaps in average family income and wealth have generally widened rather than narrowed over the past few decades. Based on SCF data, median family wealth has grown much more rapidly for white families than for other families over the past few decades, while median family incomes have risen by about the same amount for white, black, and Hispanic families. As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue. That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural. After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities. 13 Federal Reserve Work on Labor Market Disparities While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. The Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work. One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves. For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups. The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys. 14 Each recent edition of the semiannual Monetary Policy Report (MPR) has focused on some aspect of the comparative economic experience of different racial and ethnic groups. In addition, as indicated in the minutes published after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), Federal Reserve staff regularly report on the differential labor experiences of different racial and ethnic groups as background for the FOMC's deliberations on monetary policy. Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth. The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement. The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics. The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs. 15 In short, a deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity. Let me conclude by thanking you again for having me here today and allowing me the opportunity to explore some of the factors that influence labor market disparities. References Alichi, Ali, Kory Kantenga, and Juan Solè (2016). " Income Polarization in the United States (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper 16/121. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Bayer, Amanda, and Cecelia Elena Rouse (2016). "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 30 (Fall), pp. 221-42. Bernstein, Jared (2013). "The Impact of Inequality on Growth." Washington: Center for American Progress. Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle (forthcoming). "Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). " Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Carpenter, Seth, and William M. Rodgers (2004). "The Disparate Labor Market Impacts of Monetary Policy," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , vol. 23 (Fall), pp. 813-30. Fryer, Jr., Roland G. (2011). "Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4b. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 855‑971. Marrero, Gustavo, and Juan Rodrìguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Ritter, Joseph A., and Lowell J. Taylor (2011). "Racial Disparity in Unemployment," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 93 (February), pp. 30-42. Semega, Jessica L., Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar (2017). " Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF) ," Current Population Reports, pp. 60-259. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). " So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy ," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown," a conference sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Christopher Smith for their assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Bayer and Rouse (2016). Return to text 3. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf . Return to text 4. For evidence on the relationship between monetary policy and labor market disparities between some demographic groups, see Carpenter and Rodgers (2004). Return to text 5. For more on inequality of opportunity see Marrero and Rodriquez (2013). Return to text 6. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data (to be released on September 27); for additional analysis of these data, see Bricker and others (forthcoming). Return to text 7. See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending. Return to text 8. For a discussion of gender disparities, see Yellen (2015). Return to text 9. See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market. Return to text 10. Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical gaps are provided by Cajner and others (2017). Return to text 11. Staff calculations from forthcoming SCF data. Recent estimates of household income from Current Population Survey data and reported by the Census in Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar (2017) are qualitatively similar, in that between 2013 and 2016 for both sets of data, family income has increased for whites, blacks, and Hispanics (with greater increases, in percentage terms, for black and Hispanic families). Return to text 12. Racial and ethnic differences in median income and wealth are somewhat smaller. For example, in 2016 median income for white families was about $61,000, compared with $35,000 for black families and $39,000 for Hispanic families. Median wealth was about $171,000 for white families, compared with about $20,000 for black and Hispanic families. The larger gap in average income and wealth than median income and wealth reflects a greater concentration of income and wealth among the wealthiest white families than for other races and ethnicities. Return to text 13. For example, see Fryer (2011) and Ritter and Taylor (2011). Return to text 14. Further information on these surveys are found on the Board's website; see the Survey of Consumer Finances ; the Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking ; the Survey of Young Workers ; and the Survey of Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (PDF) . Return to text 15. For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, see https://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute , for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, see https://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp , and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, see https://www.investinwork.org . Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 27, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Panel on Monetary Policy "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C. Share Watch Live I enjoyed Ben Bernanke's paper titled "Monetary Policy in a New Era." 1 He presents a compelling diagnosis of the issues facing policymakers and discusses a variety of policy options. Bernanke proposes an approach to policy that is elegant and straightforward to communicate. I will focus on those elements that I find particularly relevant for the challenges faced by policymakers and suggest some implications and complications. My comments are not intended to address current policy. 2 The New Normal Policymakers in advanced economies are confronting a different constellation of challenges today than those that dominated the canon of U.S. monetary policymaking over the previous half-century, which I refer to as the "new normal." 3 A key feature of the new normal is that the neutral interest rate--the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with the economy growing close to its potential rate, full employment, and stable inflation--appears to be much lower than it was in the decades prior to the crisis. In the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median FOMC participant expected a longer-run real federal funds rate, after subtracting inflation, of 3/4 percent, down sharply from the value the first time the policy projection was published in the January 2012 SEP of 2-1/4 percent--and the average value in the decades prior to the financial crisis of 2-1/2 percent. 4 The low level of the neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to offset adverse developments and thereby can be expected to increase the frequency and duration of periods when the policy rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target. In this environment, frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations, which could amplify the degree and persistence of shortfalls of inflation, thereby making future lower bound episodes even more challenging in terms of output and employment losses. To the extent it is weighing on longer-run inflation expectations, the persistently low level of the neutral federal funds rate may be a factor contributing to the persistent shortfall of U.S. inflation from the FOMC's target. 5 Further complicating the ability of central banks to achieve their inflation objectives in today's new normal is the very flat Phillips curve observed in the United States and many other advanced economies, which makes the relationship between labor market conditions and price inflation more tenuous. For instance, inflation has remained stubbornly below the FOMC's 2 percent target for the past five years even as unemployment has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.2 percent, a level that most experts believe is in the vicinity of full employment. 6 Bernanke's paper provides an excellent review of the Federal Reserve's efforts to operate in this new environment and makes some interesting new proposals. Reflecting on the Fed's available "policy toolbox," Bernanke concludes that the available tools are not likely to be sufficient and proposes a framework that relies on forward guidance with commitment to help central banks achieve their inflation and employment objectives. The Makeup Principle The academic literature on monetary policy suggests a variety of prescriptions for preventing a lower neutral rate of interest from eroding longer-run inflation expectations. The paper argues convincingly that many of these proposals present practical difficulties that would create a very high bar for their adoption. For instance, raising the inflation target sufficiently to provide meaningfully greater policy space could engender public discomfort or, at the other extreme, risk unmooring inflation expectations. The transition to a notably higher target is likely to be challenging and could heighten uncertainty. As I have noted previously, the persistence of the shortfall in inflation from our objective is an important consideration for monetary policy. 7 The makeup principle, in which policy would make up for past misses of the inflation target, is not reflected in most standard monetary policy frameworks, although it is an important precept in theory. 8 Some of the proposals that have been advanced to implement this principle present some difficulties. For example, while price-level targeting would be helpful in the aftermath of a recession that puts the economy at the effective lower bound, it could require tightening into a negative supply shock, which is a very unattractive feature, as Bernanke points out. 9 Bernanke proposes a framework that avoids this undesirable possibility by implementing a temporary price-level targeting framework only in periods where conventional policy is constrained by the lower bound. Bernanke's proposal thus has the advantage of maintaining standard practice in normal times while proposing a makeup policy in periods when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound and inflation is below target. His proposed temporary price-level target would delay the liftoff of the policy rate from the lower bound until the average inflation over the entire lower bound episode has reached 2 percent and full employment is achieved. This type of policy, which would result in temporary overshooting of the inflation target in order to make up for the previous period of undershooting, is designed to, in Bernanke's words, "calibrate the vigor of the policy response...to the severity of the episode." The Normalization Bias The proposed temporary price-level targeting policy is designed to address what I see as one of the key challenges facing policymakers. Following deep recessions of the type we experienced in 2008-09, there appears to be an important premium on "normalization." This was apparent in 2010, for instance, when there was substantial pressure among Group of Twenty officials to commit to timelines and targets for reducing fiscal support and to articulate exit principles for monetary policy. 10 This inclination proved premature, as was evident from the subsequent intensification of the euro-area crisis. Moreover, the benchmark for "normal" tends to be defined in terms of pre-crisis standards that involved policy settings well away from the lower bound, at least initially, because it may take some time to learn about important changes in underlying financial and economic relationships. For example, the factors underlying what we now understand to be the new normal of persistently low interest rates were in many cases initially viewed as temporary headwinds. In these circumstances, a standard policy framework calibrated around the pre-crisis or "old" normal may be biased to underachieving the inflation target in a low neutral rate environment. The kind of policy framework that Bernanke proposes, which pre-commits to implementing the makeup principle based on the actual observed performance of inflation during a lower bound episode, could guard against premature liftoff and help prevent the erosion of longer-term inflation expectations. Monetary policymakers operate in an environment of considerable uncertainty and therefore have to weigh the risks of tightening too little or too late against those of tightening too much or too soon. While past experience has conditioned U.S. policymakers to be highly attentive to the risks associated with a breakout of inflation to the upside, as in the 1970s, they balance these risks against those associated with undershooting the inflation target persistently, as in Japan in the late 1990s and the 2000s. In weighing these risks, the standard approach is typically designed to achieve "convergence from below," in which inflation gradually rises to its target. Given the lags in the effects of monetary policy, convergence from below would necessitate raising interest rates preemptively, well in advance of inflation reaching its target. Moreover, particularly in the early stage of a recovery, this kind of preemptive approach tends of necessity to rely on economic relationships derived from pre-crisis observations, when policy rates were comfortably above the lower bound. During a period when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound, Bernanke's proposal would represent a substantial departure from the standard approach. While a standard policy framework would tend to prescribe that tightening should start preemptively, well before inflation reaches target, Bernanke's temporary price-level target proposal would imply maintaining the policy rate at the lower bound well past the point at which inflation has risen above target. In principle, policymakers would have to be willing to accept elevated rates of above-target inflation for a period following a lengthy period of undershooting. Just as policymakers could run a risk of low inflation becoming entrenched in the standard preemptive framework, so, too, there are risks in the temporary price-level target framework. One risk is that the public, seeing elevated rates of inflation, may start to doubt that the central bank is still serious about its inflation target. It is worth noting that the policy is motivated by the opposite concern--that convergence from below, following an extended lower bound episode, may lead to an unanchoring of inflation expectations to the downside. Still, a conscious policy of overshooting may be difficult to calibrate, especially since the large confidence intervals around inflation forecasts suggest that the risks of an undesired overshooting are nontrivial. A related risk is that the central bank would lose its nerve: Maintaining the interest rate at zero in the face of a strong economy and inflation notably above its target would place a central bank in uncomfortable territory. One additional challenge of the proposed framework is specifying a path for the policy rate immediately following liftoff that smoothly and gradually eases inflation back down to target and facilitates a gradual adjustment of the labor market. In the proposed framework, once the cumulative average rate of inflation during the lower-bound period has reached the target of 2 percent, policy would revert to a standard policy rule. 11 This implies that a standard policy rule would kick in at a point when inflation is above target and the economy is at or beyond full employment. Even with a smoothing (inertial) property, a standard policy rule could result in a relatively sharp path of tightening, and the anticipation of the steep post-liftoff rate path itself could undo some of the benefits associated with the framework. Thus, there would likely need to be a transitional framework to guide policy initially post-liftoff that might make both communications and policy somewhat more complicated. Integrating the Policy Rate and the Balance Sheet The temporary price-level targeting framework proposed by Bernanke is appealing on a conceptual level because it proposes a simple and clear mechanism to help policymakers deal with the challenges posed by the lower bound on the policy rate in an environment of uncertainty. The reality is more complicated, however, especially if, as the paper suggests, many central banks in advanced economies are likely to operate with an additional tool when the policy rate is constrained. In the paper, Bernanke cites Chair Yellen's 2016 Jackson Hole speech, which suggests that in a recession, the FOMC could be expected to turn to large-scale asset purchases as well as forward guidance after the federal funds rate is lowered to zero. 12 Today, when many central banks in advanced economies are operating with two distinct tools, policymakers consider the effects of the balance sheet as well as the policy rate in their assessment of the extent of accommodation provided by monetary policy. In the United States, from the time tapering was first discussed to the September 2017 meeting, when the path for balance sheet runoff was adopted, FOMC minutes and statements suggest that participants considered the degree of accommodation provided by both policy tools in their discussions of the sequencing and timing of changes to policy settings. Discussions about the sequencing of "normalization" and the delay of balance sheet runoff "until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way" effectively consider the extent to which maintaining the balance sheet may continue to provide makeup support for the economy while enabling the policy rate to escape the lower bound earlier than otherwise in a low neutral rate environment. As Bernanke acknowledges, now that many central banks have developed playbooks specifying the operational modalities associated with asset purchases, and there is some familiarity with their effects on asset prices and financial conditions, there is a greater likelihood that asset purchases would become a part of the policy reaction function, along with forward guidance, during lower-bound episodes. Yet, as I have noted previously in the international context, asset purchases can complicate policy frameworks and communications, because their deployment and withdrawal has tended to be discontinuous and discrete and thus may be associated with greater uncertainty about the policy reaction function. 13 It appears the public closely follows statements about both the policy rate and asset purchases to glean possible information about the future overall stance of monetary policy. This suggests there may be benefits in communications and predictability of a unified policy framework across the tools that is more predictable and continuous. Relatedly, one helpful elaboration of the framework Bernanke proposes might be to incorporate a unified measure, or shadow rate, that would capture the degree of policy accommodation provided through the combined settings of both asset purchases and the policy rate. 14 Greater Cross-Border Spillovers Moving away from the policy proposal in the paper, there are two other aspects of a low neutral rate world that I want to touch on briefly: cross-border spillovers and financial imbalances. The new normal appears to be characterized by low neutral rates and a weak relationship between overall inflation and unemployment not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies with lower-bound episodes likely to be more prevalent. The current environment appears also to evidence intensified cross-border feedback into financial conditions. 15 In this kind of environment, it is conceivable the kind of committed forward guidance associated with the temporary price-level targeting framework proposed by Bernanke, by helping rule out anticipation of a standard preemptive tightening, could help avoid unwarranted premature tightening through the exchange rate. Given available data, it is difficult to disentangle whether the heightened cross-border feedback effects are attributable to the low level of neutral rates, particular features of today's lower-bound episodes, or the interaction of the policies adopted by many central banks. In any case, recent Federal Reserve staff analysis suggests that cross-border spillovers have increased notably since the crisis and are quite large. For instance, European Central Bank policy news that leads to a 10 basis point decrease in the German 10-year term premium is associated with a roughly 5 basis point decrease in the U.S. 10-year term premium; by contrast, these spillovers were smaller in the years leading up to the crisis. 16 Moreover, news about policy rates and term premiums appears to have quite different effects on exchange rates, such that the ordering of policy normalization can have important implications for exchange rates and associated financial conditions, as I discussed earlier this year. 17 Recent staff estimates suggest that news about expected changes in the policy rate tends to have a large spillover through the exchange rate, whereas news about changes in term premiums tends to lead to corresponding cross-border changes in term premiums, as discussed previously, with much smaller effects on the exchange rate. Moreover, the exchange rate effect of changes in short-term rates is much greater than it was pre-crisis. For instance, policy news that leads to a 25 basis point increase in the expected interest rate portion of the 10‑year Treasury yield is associated with a roughly 3 percentage point appreciation in the dollar, which is three times greater than the response pre-crisis. By contrast, policy news surrounding a change in U.S. term premiums has a muted effect on the exchange rate both now and pre-crisis. Financial Imbalances Finally, a low neutral rate environment may also be associated with a heightened risk of asset price bubbles, which could exacerbate the tradeoff for monetary policy between achieving the traditional dual-mandate goals and preventing the kinds of imbalances that could contribute to financial instability. Standard asset-valuation models suggest that a persistently low neutral rate, depending on the factors driving it, could lead to higher ratios of asset prices to underlying income flows--for example, higher ratios of prices to earnings for stocks or higher prices of buildings relative to rents. If asset markets were highly efficient and participants had excellent foresight, this would not necessarily lead to imbalances. However, to the extent that financial markets extrapolate price movements, markets may not transition smoothly to asset valuations that reflect underlying fundamentals but may instead evidence periods of overshooting. 18 Such forces may have played a role in both the stock market boom that ended in the bust of 2001 and the house price bubble that burst in 2007-09. The risks of such financial imbalances may be greater in the context of the kind of explicit inflation target overshooting policies proposed in the paper. Again, if market participants were perfectly rational, overshooting policies would not likely pose financial stability risks. But the combination of low interest rates and low unemployment that would prevail during the inflation overshooting period could well spark capital markets to overextend, leading to financial imbalances. Macroprudential tools are the preferred first line of defense to address such financial imbalances, which should in principle enable monetary policy to focus on price stability and macroeconomic stabilization. But the development and deployment of macroprudential tools is still relatively untested in the U.S. context, and the toolkit is limited. Although important research suggests that the situations under which monetary policy should take financial imbalances into account are likely to be very rare, some recent research has pointed out that the case in favor of taking financial imbalances into account is strengthened when the consequences of financial crises are long lasting. 19 In this case, another complication of a persistently low neutral rate may be a sharper tradeoff between achieving the traditional dual-mandate objectives and avoiding financial stability risks, which may make it even more difficult to achieve our price-stability objective. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2017). "Monetary Policy for a New Era," paper prepared for "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12. Brainard, Lael (2015). " Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low ," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2016a). " What Happened to the Great Divergence? " speech delivered at the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 26. -------- (2016b). " The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs, Chicago, September 12. -------- (2017a). " Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization ," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13. -------- (2017b). " Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate ," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson (2012). " What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 265-98. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). " The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 139-233. Gerdrup, Karsten R., Frank Hansen, Tord Krogh, and Junior Maib (2017). " Leaning against the Wind When Credit Bites Back ," International Journal of Central Banking, September. Gourio, Francois, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jae Sim (2016). " The Tradeoffs in Leaning against the Wind (PDF) ," paper presented at the 17th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 3. Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer (2014). "Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns," Review of Financial Studies, vol. 27 (March), pp. 714-46. Kamin, Steven B., Canlin Li, and Marius D. Rodriguez (forthcoming). "International Spillovers from Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). " Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Krippner, Leo (2016). " Documentation for Measures of Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Working Paper. Wellington, New Zealand: Reserve Bank of New Zealand, July. Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). " The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Svensson, Lars E. (2016). "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind," NBER Working Papers Series 21902. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Wu, Jing Cynthia, and Fan Dora Xia (2016). "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 48 (March-April), pp. 253-91. Yellen, Janet L. (2016). " The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future ," speech at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26. 1. Bernanke (2017). Return to text 2. I am grateful to John Roberts for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 3. See Brainard (2015, 2016b). Return to text 4. The well-known Laubach-Williams model currently suggests an estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate that is close to zero. The latest estimates are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's website at http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx . Over the 1960-2007 period, the real federal funds rate--measured as the nominal federal funds rate less trailing four-quarter core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation--averaged 2-1/2 percent. Return to text 5. See, for example, Brainard (2017b), Kiley and Roberts (2017), and Nakata and Schmidt (2016). Return to text 6. The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis. Return to text 7. See Brainard (2017b). Return to text 8. See, for example, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) or Reifschneider and Williams (2000). Return to text 9. As Bernanke notes, one way to avoid this feature is to adopt "flexible price-level targeting," in which policy takes into account resource utilization as well as the deviation of the price level from its target. Kiley and Roberts (2017) examine a form of flexible price-level targeting—which they refer to as a "shadow rate rule"—and find that it performs well. Return to text 10. The 2010 G-20 Toronto communiqué indicated that advanced economies "committed to fiscal plans that will at least halve deficits by 2013 and stabilize or reduce government debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016." The document is available on the U.S. Department of the Treasury's website at https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/international/Documents/The%20G-20%20Toronto%20Summit%20Declaration.pdf (PDF) . Return to text 11. In the paper, this rule is specified as an inertial Taylor rule. Return to text 12. See Yellen (2016). Return to text 13. See Brainard (2015). Return to text 14. See, for instance, Krippner (2016) and Wu and Xia (2016). Return to text 15. See Brainard (2016a, 2016b). Return to text 16. See Kamin, Li, and Rodriguez (forthcoming). Return to text 17. See Brainard (2017a). Return to text 18. See, for example, Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) and Greenwood and Schleifer (2014). Return to text 19. See, for example, Svensson (2016). See Gourio, Kashyap, and Sim (2016) and Gerdrup and others (2016). Return to text Last Update: October 12, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Regional Food Systems Meeting, Boston, Massachusetts Share Thank you for inviting me. I appreciate the opportunity to listen and learn about the important work that you do. 1 One of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities is to understand how communities across America are experiencing the economy. That is why Congress established a network of Federal Reserve Banks and Branches across the country. Our local presence gives us valuable opportunities to engage with communities across a broad spectrum--from those who are thriving to those who are confronting challenges, and from inner-city neighborhoods to rural towns. One of the lessons that our community engagement has taught us is that there is an important connection between the strength of regional food systems and community health. Today's meeting is one in a series that Federal Reserve Banks are holding across the country to talk about local efforts to support regional food systems, and how such efforts can advance communities' goals. These meetings build on the Federal Reserve Board's release last August of Harvesting Opportunity, a publication that explores the community and economic development potential of investing in regional food systems. 2 Through this collaborative research effort, we learned several important lessons about what works to strengthen regional food systems. First, we learned that appropriately tailored investments in regional food systems have the potential to support the creation of new jobs and small businesses in local communities, as well as to improve farm profitability and financial resilience. Second, we learned that in order to take advantage of new business opportunities in the regional food sector, entrepreneurs need access to capital, specialized knowledge, and general business skills. Unfortunately, one or more of these is often missing from historically marginalized communities. We also learned that organizations across the country are filling these gaps and empowering communities to take advantage of opportunities. I understand that many of you in this room are engaged in this important work; for that I thank you and hope that this meeting will help advance your efforts. As a result of an intentional focus on equity and inclusiveness, these investments can create new access to economic opportunity for segments of communities that have often faced challenges, such as people of color, recent immigrants, the formerly homeless, and the previously incarcerated. Lastly, we learned that no organization has all of the resources or expertise necessary to effectively carry out this work alone. As such, long-term partnerships and collaboration are necessary for success in implementing regional food strategies. Because of the critical role of multi-sectoral partnerships, I am heartened to see so many of you here today to talk about the current state of regional food system investment in New England, to build new relationships, and to strengthen existing ones. It is this ongoing commitment to working together that will carry you through to the next stage of regional food systems development. Later today, I will be meeting with several local organizations that not only bring important resources and expertise to their communities, but also exemplify this important dedication to partnership and cross-sector collaboration. The Urban Farming Institute of Boston demonstrates dedication to cross-sector collaboration through their Farmer Training Program, many of whose graduates go on to work for or start up regional food enterprises. They also advance the broader regional food system by co-hosting an annual conference that brings together farmers, policymakers, investors, and other stakeholders. Likewise, CommonWealth Kitchen has emerged as an important hub where farmers, entrepreneurs, universities, investors, and other stakeholders come together in ways that not only advance regional food systems, but also increase access to economic opportunity for people impacted by racial, social, or economic inequality. In this way, CommonWealth Kitchen is dedicated to addressing Greater Boston's growing wealth divide by promoting inclusive entrepreneurship through an integrated approach that links education, training, and manufacturing to a strong network of industry partners, including anchor institutions. These are just two examples of the great work going on in New England, and I look forward to visiting both organizations later today. This morning, I am eager to learn about the work of the many organizations represented here, especially the barriers and opportunities you face when trying to invest in this sector, and how your investments are linking more families and communities to meaningful economic opportunities. Attending events like this and visiting communities around the country provide me with opportunities to speak with families, farmers, small business owners, investors, bankers, and other community members about their experiences in the economy. These conversations help me to develop a granular and very human understanding of the economy that, when combined with the information provided by our traditional research and data collection efforts, are important considerations informing judgments about policy. A community-level understanding of the economy is especially important in today's economy, where we see welcome strength in the aggregate statistics coexisting side-by-side with important disparities at the community and family levels. In addition to disparities based on the community where a family lives and significant and persistent racial disparities, I have been struck while traveling around the country by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas. The statistics bear this out: the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically over recent decades. 3 Much of the gains in employment, income, and wealth since the end of the recession--and more broadly over the past few decades--have accrued to workers and families in larger cities. If some workers and families find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the economy overall. In my visits, I have also been heartened by the efforts of local partners to address these disparities and improve their communities, including those aimed at capitalizing on local food-based assets to advance economic opportunity and address food insecurity. For instance, in El Paso, I visited with several vibrant community organizations that were running community gardens, local nutrition and farming educational outreach programs, a commercial kitchen, and a food pantry to improve nutrition and access to fresh food in an area that lacked full-scale grocery stores. In the Mississippi Delta, I met with people involved in an interesting collaboration between a local entrepreneur, a community development financial institution, the engineering department of a local community college, local farmers, and local food organizations--the aim of which was to produce biofuels from food waste. Of course, pockets of both opportunity and persistent poverty are found in large metro and rural areas alike. In fact, a recent report found Boston to have one of the highest rates of income inequality among the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the United States, despite the overall strength of Boston's economy. 4 Findings like this remind us that not all communities are well positioned to access the opportunities available in the economy, even those in their own backyard. Our research suggests there are things that can be done to improve the likelihood that an area will be a community of opportunity. Some localities have fared better than others in this respect, and their successes can provide us with actionable lessons. For instance, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston undertook an in-depth study of 25 medium-sized cities nationwide that had experienced a post-industrial decline and identified 10 that experienced an economic resurgence. The study found that the critical determinant of success was the ability of leaders in those cities to collaborate across sectors around a long-term vision for revitalization. 5 To encourage such collaboration, the Boston Fed has facilitated Working Cities Challenges in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut that reward effective public–private collaboration to reach communitywide goals. For instance, one of the winning cities, Lawrence, Massachusetts, set goals of increasing the income of parents with children in the Lawrence Public School system by 15 percent, dramatically increasing parental engagement in the schools and tracking the impact of these efforts on student achievement. A cross-section of partners from the public, private, nonprofit, and philanthropic sectors sought to achieve this, in part, by embedding Family Resource Centers within the Lawrence Public Schools. To-date, these efforts have placed over 200 parents in new positions paying 25 percent higher wages on average than their previous jobs, with 200 more parents in the training pipeline. Learning about what works reinforces for me the importance of events like this one: events that bring together different stakeholders to talk about the future of their communities and how they can work together to advance common goals. Thank you for being our valued partners in this important work. 1. I am grateful to Andrew Dumont for his assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. A. Dumont, D. Davis, J. Wascalus, T. Cheeks Wilson, J. Barham, and D. Tropp. Harvesting Opportunity: The Power of Regional Food System Investments to Transform Communities (St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2017). Return to text 3. P. Ganong, and D.W. Shoag. " Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined? " National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23609 (Cambridge, Mass: NBER, 2017). Return to text 4. Natalie Holmes and Alan Berube. "City and Metropolitan Inequality on the Rise, Driven by Declining Incomes ." (Washington: Brookings Institution, January 2016). Return to text 5. Y.K. Kodrzycki, A.P. Muñoz, L. Browne, D. Green, M. Benton, P. Chakrabarti, D. Plasse, R. Walker, and B. Zhao. " Reinvigorating Springfield's Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities ," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Community Affairs Discussion Paper No. 2009-03 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 2009). Return to text Last Update: November 15, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "FinTech Risks and Opportunities: An Interdisciplinary Approach," a conference sponsored by the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan Share The new generation of fintech tools offers the potential to help consumers manage their increasingly complicated financial lives, but also poses risks that will need to be managed as the marketplace matures. 1 In many ways, the new generation of fintech tools can be seen as the financial equivalent of an autopilot. The powerful new fintech tools represent the convergence of numerous advances in research and technology--ranging from new insights into consumer decisionmaking to a revolution in available data, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence (AI). They operate by guiding consumers through complex decisions by offering new ways of looking at a consumer's overall financial picture or simplifying choices, for example with behavioral nudges. As consumers start to rely on financial autopilots, however, it is important that they remain in the driver's seat and have a good handle on what is happening under the hood. Consumers need to know and decide who they are contracting with, what data of theirs is being used by whom and for what purpose, how to revoke data access and delete stored data, and how to seek relief if things go wrong. In short, consumers should remain in control of the data they provide. In addition, consumers should receive clear disclosure of the factors that are reflected in the recommendations they receive. If these issues can be appropriately addressed, the new fintech capabilities have enormous potential to deliver analytically grounded financial services and simplified choices, tailored to the consumers' needs and preferences, and accessible via their smartphones. 2 Consumers Face Complex Financial Choices When the first major "credit card," the Diner's Club Card, was introduced in 1949, consumers could only use the cardboard card at restaurants and, importantly, only if they paid the entire amount due each month. 3 Today, the average cardholder has about four credit cards, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimates that American consumers collectively carry $785 billion in credit card debt. 4 When signing up for a credit card, consumers face a bewildering array of choices. Half of consumers report that they select new cards based on reward programs, weighing "cash back" offers against "points" with their credit card provider that may convert into airline or hotel "miles," which may have varying values depending on how they are redeemed. 5 In some cases, rewards may apply to specific spending categories that rotate by quarter and require that consumers re-register each term, and the rewards may expire or be forfeited under complicated terms. 6 In some cases, the choices may be confusing. Let's take the example of zero percent interest credit card promotions. A consumer may choose a zero percent interest credit card promotion and expect to pay no interest on balances during a promotional period, after which any balances are assessed at a higher rate of interest going forward. But if a consumer instead chooses a zero percent interest private-label credit card with deferred interest and has a positive balance when the promotional period expires, interest could be retroactively assessed for the full time they held a balance during the promotional period. 7 Even sophisticated consumers could be excused for confusing these products. As it turns out, it is often the most vulnerable consumers who have to navigate the most complicated products. For instance, one recent study of the credit card market found that the average length of agreements for products offered to subprime consumers was 70 percent longer than agreements for other products. 8 The complexity multiplies when we go beyond credit cards and consider other dimensions of consumers' financial lives. 9 The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has found that nearly a quarter of the Americans that don't maintain bank accounts are concerned that bank fees are too unpredictable. 10 Even though mortgage debt is over two-thirds of household debt, nearly half of consumers don't comparison shop before taking out a mortgage. 11 Student loans now make up 11 percent of total household debt, more than twice its share in 2008. 12 Over 11 percent of student debt is more than 90 days delinquent or in default--and researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimate that this figure may understate the problem by as much as half. 13 Today, consumers navigate numerous weighty financial responsibilities for themselves and their dependents. 14 It seems fair to assume they could use some help managing this complexity. In the Federal Reserve Board's annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), more than half of respondents reported that their spending exceeded their income in the prior year. 15 Indeed, 44 percent of SHED respondents reported that they could not cover an emergency expense costing $400 without selling something or borrowing money. 16 New Tools to Help Consumers Manage Their Finances Given the complexity and importance of these decisions, it is encouraging to see the fast-growing development of advanced, technology-enabled tools to help consumers navigate the complex issues in their financial lives. These tools build on important advances in our understanding of consumer financial behavior and the applications, or "app," ecosystem. Researchers have invested decades of work exploring how consumers actually make decisions. We all tend to use shortcuts to simplify financial decisions, and it turns out many of these can prove faulty, particularly when dealing with complex problems. 17 For example, empirical evidence consistently shows that consumers overvalue the present and undervalue the future. 18 Researchers have documented that consumers make better savings decisions when they are presented with fewer options. 19 They have shown the importance of "anchoring" bias--the tendency to place disproportionate weight on the first piece of information presented. This bias can lead consumers either to make poor financial choices or instead to tip the scales in favor of beneficial choices, as with automatic savings defaults. 20 Similarly, "nudges" can help consumers in the right circumstances or instead backfire in surprising ways. 21 These behavioral insights are especially powerful when paired with the remarkable advances we have seen in the technological tools available to the average consumer, especially through their smartphones. 22 Smartphones are ubiquitous. The 2016 Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer and Mobile Financial Services (SCMF) found that 87 percent of the U.S. adult population had a mobile phone, the vast majority of which were smartphones. 23 Smartphone use is prevalent even among the unbanked and underbanked populations. Survey evidence suggests we are three times more likely to reach for our phone than our significant other when we first wake up in the morning. 24 Some evidence suggests that smartphones are already helping consumers make better financial decisions. The 2016 SCMF found that 62 percent of mobile banking users checked their account balances on their phones before making a large purchase, and half of those that did so decided not to purchase an item as a result. 25 In addition, 41 percent of smartphone owners checked product reviews or searched product information online while shopping in a retail store, and 79 percent of those respondents reported changing their purchase decision based on the information they accessed on their smartphone. 26 And those use cases just scratch the surface of what is possible. First of all, the smartphone platform has become a launch pad for a whole ecosystem of apps created by outside developers for a wide variety of services, including helping consumers manage their financial lives. Second, the smartphone ecosystem puts the enormous computing power of the cloud at the fingertips of consumers. Interfacing with smartphone platforms and other apps, outside developers can tap the computing power of the leading cloud computing providers in building their apps. Importantly, cloud computing offers not only the power to process and store data, but also powerful algorithms to make sense of it. Due to early commitment to open-source principles, app developers have open access to many of the same machine-learning and artificial intelligence tools that power the world's largest internet companies. 27 Further, the major cloud computing providers have now taken these free building blocks and created different machine-learning and artificial intelligence stacks on their cloud platforms. A developer that wants to incorporate artificial intelligence into their financial management app can access off-the-shelf models of cloud computing providers, potentially getting to market faster than by taking the traditional route of finding training data and building out models in-house from scratch. Third, fintech developers can also draw from enormous pools of data that were previously unavailable outside of banking institutions. Consumer financial data are increasingly available to developers via a new breed of business-to-business suppliers, called data aggregators. 28 These companies enable outside developers to access consumer account and transactional information typically stored by banks. But aggregators do more than just provide access to raw data. They facilitate its use by developers, by cleaning the data, standardizing it across institutions, and offering their own application programming interfaces for easy integration. Further, similar to cloud computing providers, data aggregators are also beginning to provide off-the-shelf product stacks on their own platforms. 29 This means that developers can quickly and easily incorporate product features, such as predicting creditworthiness, determining how much a consumer can save each month, or creating alerts for potential overdraft charges. Researchers have documented the benefits of tailored one-on-one financial coaching. 30 Until recently, though, it has been hard to deliver that kind of service affordably and at scale, due to differences in consumers' circumstances. Let's again consider the example of deferred interest credit cards. It turns out only a small minority of consumers miss the deadlines for repaying promotional balances and are charged retroactive interest payments, and they typically have deep subprime scores. 31 Similarly, for consumers that opt into overdraft products on their checking accounts, 8 percent of consumers pay 75 percent of the fees. 32 Up until now, it has been hard for consumers to understand those odds and objectively assess whether they are likely to be in the group of customers that will face challenges with a particular financial product. The convergence of smartphone ubiquity, cloud computing, data aggregation, and off-the-shelf AI products offer the potential to make tailored financial advice scalable. For instance, a fintech developer could pair historical data about how different types of consumers fare with a specific product, on the one hand, with a consumer's particular financial profile, on the other hand, to make a prediction about how that consumer is likely to fare with the product. The Evolution of Financial Autopilots Since the early days of internet commerce, developers have tried to move beyond simple price comparison tools to offer tailored "agents" for consumers that can recommend products based on analyses of individual behavior and preferences. 33 Today, a new generation of personal financial management tools seems poised to make that leap. When a consumer wishes to select a new financial product, he or she can now solicit options from a number of websites and mobile apps. These new comparison sites can walk the consumer through a wide array of financial products, offering to compare features like rewards, fees, and rates, or tailoring to a consumer's stated goals. Some fintech advisors ask consumers to provide access to their bank accounts, retirement accounts, college savings accounts, and other investment platforms in order to enable a fintech advisor to offer a consumer a single, near complete picture of his balances and cash flows across different institutions. In reviewing the advertising, terms and conditions, and apps of an array of fintech advisors, it appears that many of these tools offer advanced data analysis, machine learning, and even artificial intelligence to help consumers cut down on unnecessary spending, set aside money for savings, and use healthy nudges to improve their financial decisions. For instance, a fintech advisor may help a consumer automate savings "rules," like rounding up charges and putting the difference into savings, enabling these small balances to accumulate over time or setting a small amount of money aside every time a consumer spends money on little splurges. The early stages of innovation inevitably feature a lot of learning from trial and error. Fortunately, as the fintech ecosystem advances, there are useful experiences and good practices to draw upon from the evolution of the commercial internet. To begin with, one internet adage is that if a product is free, " you are the product." 34 In this vein, fintech advisors frequently offer free services to consumers and earn their revenue from the credit cards and other financial products that they recommend through lead generation. Of course, many fintech advisors are not lead generators. Some companies offer fee-for-service models, with consumers paying a monthly fee for the product. Other companies are paid by employers, who then provide the products free of charge to their employees as an employee benefit. In these cases, they likely have quite different business models. But for those services that do act as lead generators, there are important considerations about whether and how best to communicate information to the consumer about the nature of the recommendations being made. For instance, according to some reports, fintech advisors can make between $100 and $700 in lead generation fees for every customer that signs up for a credit card they recommend. 35 In many cases, a fintech advisor may describe their service as providing tailored advice or making recommendations as they would to friends and family. In such cases, a consumer might not know whether the order in which products are presented by a fintech assistant is based on the product's alignment with his or her needs or different considerations. Different fintech advisors may order the lists they show consumers using different criteria. A product may be at the top of the advisor's recommendations because the sponsoring company has paid the advisor to list it at the top, or the sponsoring company may pay the fintech assistant a high fee, contingent upon the consumer signing up for the product. Alternatively, a fintech advisor may change the order of the loan offers or credit cards based on the likelihood that the consumer will be approved. Moreover, in some cases, the absence of lead generation fees for a particular product may impact whether that product is on the list shown to consumers at all. There appears to be a wide variety of practices regarding the prominence and placement of advertising and other disclosures relative to the advice and recommendations such firms provide. Overall, fintech assistants have increasingly improved the disclosures that explain to consumers how they get paid, but this is still a work in progress. The good news is that these challenges are not new. The experience with internet search engines outside of financial products, such as Google, Bing, and Yahoo!, as well as with other product comparison sites, such as Travelocity and Yelp, may provide useful guidance. As consumers and businesses have adapted to the internet, we have, collectively, adopted norms and standards for how we can expect search and recommendation engines to operate. In particular, we generally expect that search results will be included and ranked based on what's organically most responsive to the search--unless it is clearly labeled otherwise. 36 Accordingly, when we search for a product, we now know to look for visual cues that identify paid search results, usually in the form of a text label like "Sponsored" or "Ad", different formatting, and visually separating advertising from natural search results. 37 Even when an endorsement is made in a brief Twitter update, we now expect disclosures to be clear and conspicuous. 38 As fintech advisors evolve to engage consumers in new ways, disclosure methodologies will no doubt be expected to adapt as well. For instance, some personal financial management tools now interact with consumers via text message. If consumers move to a world in which most of their interactions with their advisors occur via text-messaging "chatbots"--or voice communication--I am hopeful that industry, regulators, consumers, and other stakeholders will work together to adapt the norms to distinguish between advice and sponsored recommendations. The Data Relationship While the lead generation revenue model presents some familiar issues that are readily apparent, under the hood, fintech relationships raise even more complex issues for consumers in knowing who they are providing their data to, how their data will be used, for how long, and what to expect in the case of a breach or fraud. Let me briefly touch on each issue in turn. Often, when a consumer signs up with a fintech advisor or other fintech app, they are asked to log into their bank account in order to link the fintech app with their bank account data. In reviewing apps' enrollment processes, it appears that consumers are often shown log-in screens featuring bank logos and branding, prompting consumers to enter their online banking logins and passwords. In many cases, the apps note that they do not store the consumers' banking credentials. When the consumer logs on, he or she is often not interfacing with a banks' computer systems, but rather, providing the bank account login and password to a data aggregator that provides services to the fintech app. In many cases, the data aggregator may store the password and login and then use those credentials to periodically log into the consumer's bank account and copy available data, ranging from transaction data, to account numbers, to personally identifiable information. In other cases, things work differently under the hood. Some banks and data aggregators have agreed to work together to facilitate the ability to share data with outside developers in authorized ways. These agreements may delineate what types of data will be shared, and authorization credentials may be tokenized so that passwords are never stored by the aggregator. 39 It is often hard for the consumer to know what is actually happening under the hood of the financial app they are accessing. In most cases, the log in process does not do much to educate the consumer on the precise nature of the data relationship. Screen scraping usually invokes the bank's logo and branding but infrequently shows the logo or name of the data aggregator. In reviewing many apps, it appears that the name of the data aggregator is frequently not disclosed in the fintech app's terms and conditions, and a consumer generally would not easily see what data is held by a data aggregator or how it is used. The apps, websites, and terms and conditions of fintech advisors and data aggregators often do not explain how frequently data aggregators will access a consumer's data or how long they will store that data. 40 Recognizing this is a relatively young field, but one that is growing fast, there are a myriad of questions about the consumer's ability to opt out and control over data that will need to be addressed appropriately. In examining the terms and conditions for a number of fintech apps, it appears that consumers are rarely provided information explaining how they can terminate the collection and storage of their data. For instance, when a consumer deletes a fintech app from his or her phone, it is not clear this would guarantee that a data aggregator would delete the consumer's bank login and password, nor discontinue accessing transaction information. If a consumer severs the data access, for instance by changing banks or bank account passwords, it is also not clear how he or she can instruct the data aggregator to delete the information that has already been collected. Given that data aggregators often don't have consumer interfaces, consumers may be left to find an email address for the data aggregator, send in a deletion request, and hope for the best. If things go wrong, consumers may have limited remedies. In reviewing terms, it appears that many fintech advisors include contractual waivers that purport to limit consumers' ability to seek redress from the advisor or an underlying data aggregator. In some cases, the terms and conditions assert that the fintech developer and its third-party service providers will not be liable to consumers for the performance of or inability to use the services. It is not uncommon to see terms and conditions that limit the fintech adviser's liability to the consumer to $100. Traditionally, under the Electronic Funds Transfer Act and its implementing Regulation E, consumers have had protections to mitigate their losses in the event of erroneous or fraudulent transactions that would otherwise impact their credit and debit cards, such as data breaches. Those protections are not absolute, however. 41 In particular, if a consumer gives another person an "access device" to their account and grants them authority to make transfers, then the consumer is "fully liable" for transfers made by that person, even if that person exceeds his or her authority, until the consumer notifies the bank. 42 As the industry matures, the various stakeholders will need to develop a shared understanding of who bears responsibility in the event of a breach. 43 Shared Responsibility and Shared Benefit Moving Forward So what can be done to make sure consumers have the requisite information and control to remain squarely in the driver's seat? Establishing and implementing new norms is in the shared interest of all of the participants in the fintech stack. For instance, in the case of credit cards, mortgages, and many other products, it is often banks or parties closely affiliated with banks that pay fees to fintech advisors to generate leads for their products, pursuant to a contract. Through these contractual relationships with fintech advisors, banks have considerable influence in the lead generation relationship, including through provisions describing how a sponsored product should be described or displayed. Banks have a stake in ensuring that their vendors and third-party service providers act appropriately, that consumers are protected and treated fairly, and that the banks' reputations aren't exposed to unnecessary risk. 44 Likewise, some of the leading speech-only financial products are currently credit card and bank products. 45 Accordingly, banks have incentives to invest in innovating the way they disclose information to consumers, as they also invest in new ways of interacting with them. As for consumers' relationships with data aggregators, there's an increasing recognition that consumers need better information about the terms of their relationships with aggregators, more control over what is shared, and the ability to terminate the relationship. 46 We have spoken to data aggregators who recognize the importance of finding solutions to many of the complex issues involved with the important work of unlocking the potential of the banking stack to developers. And while there are some difficult issues in this space, other issues seem relatively straightforward. It shouldn't be hard for a consumer to be informed who they are providing their credentials to. Consumers should have relatively simple means of being able to consent to what data are being shared and at what frequency. And consumers should be able to stop data sharing and request the deletion of data that have been stored. Responsibility for establishing appropriate norms in the data aggregation space should be shared, with banks, data aggregators, fintech developers, consumers, and regulators all having a role. 47 Banks and data aggregators are negotiating new relationships to determine how they can work together to provide consumers access to their data, while also ensuring that the process is secure and leaves consumers in the driver's seat. 48 In many cases, banks themselves were often the original customers of data aggregators, and many continue to use these services. According to public filings, more than half of the 20 largest banks are customers of data aggregators. 49 The banks have an opportunity as customers of data aggregation services to ensure that the terms of data provision protect consumers' data and handle it appropriately. Regulators also recognize that there may be opportunities to provide more clarity about how the expectations about third-party risk management would work in this sector, as well as other areas experiencing significant technological change. Through external outreach and internal analysis, we are working to determine how best to encourage socially beneficial innovation in the marketplace, while ensuring that consumers' interests are protected. We recognize the importance of working together and the potential to draw upon existing policies, norms, and principles from other spaces. Consumers may not fully understand the differences in regulations across financial products or types of financial institutions, or whether the rules change when they move from familiar search and e-commerce platforms to the fintech stack. Consumers, as well as the market as a whole, will benefit if regulators coordinate to provide more unified messages and support the development of standards that serve as a natural extension of the common-sense norms that consumers have come to expect in other areas of the commercial internet. Conclusion The combination of technologies that put vast computing power, rich data sets, and artificial intelligence onto simple smartphone apps together with important research into consumer financial behaviors has great potential to help consumers navigate their complex financial lives more effectively, but there are also important risks. I am hopeful that fintech developers, data aggregators, bank partners, consumers, and regulators will work together to keep consumers in the driver's seat as we move forward with these new technologies. If we work together effectively toward this goal, the fintech stack may be able to offer enormous benefits to the consumers they aim to serve, while appropriately identifying and managing the risks. 1. I am grateful to Kelvin Chen for his assistance in preparing this text. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Lael Brainard, " The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech (PDF) ," (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation, Washington, D.C., December 2, 2016). Return to text 3. See, e.g., Damaris Olaechea, "Who Issued the First Credit Card?" Nerd Wallet (February 12, 2014), www.nerdwallet.com/blog/credit-cards/issued-first-credit-card/. Return to text 4. See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF) , Executive Summary December 2015, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2017, www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_2017Q2.pdf . Return to text 5. See J.D. Power, "Attractive Rewards and Benefits Drive Credit Card Selection, Satisfaction and Spend," press release, August 20, 2015, www.jdpower.com/sites/default/files/2015137_U.S._Credit_Card_Study_PR_Final.pdf. Return to text 6. See, e.g., Jeanine Skowronski, "Why 5 Percent Cash Back Is an Overrated Selling Point," American Banker , November 6, 2013, www.americanbanker.com/opinion/why-5-cash-back-is-an-overrated-selling-point. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF) , section 7, December 2015. Return to text 7. See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF) , section 6, December 2015. Return to text 8. Id at section 5.1.2. Return to text 9. In 2007 researchers at Carnegie Mellon estimated that it would take the average consumer 244 hours a year just to read the privacy policies of the websites that he viewed that year. Aleecia McDonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor, The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies," I/s: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society (2008), pre-press version available at http://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/readingPolicyCost-authorDraft.pdf . Return to text 10. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF) , (2015). Return to text 11. See, e.g., Michael Corkery and Stacy Cowley, "Household Debt Makes a Comeback in the U.S.," New York Times , May 17, 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/dealbook/household-debt-united-states.html; See Alexei Alexandrov and Sergei Koulayev, "No Shopping in the U.S. Mortgage Market: Direct and Strategic Effects of Providing Information," Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Office of Research Working Paper No. 2017-01 (Washington: CFPB, April 7, 2017), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2948491. ("[M]any consumers do not seem to realize that there is price dispersion. . . . In one of our counterfactuals, we show that eliminating non-price preferences results in savings of about $9 billion dollars a year.") Return to text 12. See, e.g., Michael Corkery and Stacy Cowley, "Household Debt Makes a Comeback in the U.S.," New York Times , May 17, 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/dealbook/household-debt-united-states.html. ("Student borrowers today owe $1.3 trillion, more than double the $611 billion owed nearly nine years ago. About one in 10 student borrowers is behind on repaying the loans, the highest delinquency rate of any type of loan tracked by the New York Fed's quarterly household debt report."); Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A.Windle, " Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bulletin vol. 103, no. 3 (September 2017). Return to text 13. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit (PDF) , August 2017. ( "...[D]elinquency rates for student loans are likely to understate effective delinquency rates because about half of these loans are currently in deferment, in grace periods or in forbearance and therefore temporarily not in the repayment cycle. This implies that among loans in the repayment cycle delinquency rates are roughly twice as high." Id. n.2 ). Return to text 14. This can be particularly challenging for older consumers. See, e.g., AARP, " Financial Innovation Frontiers (PDF) ," April 2017. ("50+ Consumers Face Unprecedented Financial Complexity.") Return to text 15. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016 (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2017). Return to text 16. Id. Return to text 17. See, e.g., Krista Tippett, On Being , radio interview with Daniel Kahneman, October 5, 2017. ("...[It] is actually completely not possible for a finite human mind to be rational or to obey the axioms of rationality. You'd have to know too much . . . [T]he cognitive rules are, to a large extent, simplifying rules. They are shortcuts.") Return to text 18. See, e.g., David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, " Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle (PDF) ," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13314 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, August 2007). Return to text 19. See, e.g., John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Bridgitt C. Madrian, " Simplification and Saving (PDF) ," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12659 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 2006). ("Many financial decisions that individuals face are complicated and daunting for those who are not financial experts. .By collapsing a multidimensional set of options into a binary choice between the status quo and the pre-selected alternative, this intervention increases participation rates by 10 to 20 percentage points among affected employees."); Sheena S. Iyengar, Wei Jiang, and Gur Huberman, " How Much Choice is Too Much?: Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans (PDF) ," Pension Research Council Working Paper (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, The Wharton School, PRC, 2003). ("Using data from nearly 800,000 employees, …[our] results confirm that participation in 401(k) plans is higher in plans offering a handful of funds, as compared to plans offering ten or more options.") Return to text 20. See, e.g., Daniel Navarro-Martinez, et al., "Minimum Required Payment and Supplemental Information Disclosure Effects on Consumer Debt Repayment Decisions," Journal of Marketing Research , vol. 48 (November 2011), http://journals.ama.org/doi/pdf/10.1509/jmkr.48.SPL.S60?code=amma-site. ("They find that while presenting minimum required payment information has a negative impact on repayment decisions, increasing the minimum required level has a positive effect on repayment for most consumers.") See, e.g., Bridgette C. Madrian, " Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral Economics Perspective (PDF) ," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18220 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2012). ("Indeed, automatic enrollment is an extreme form of simplification; individuals who want to save need not do anything. Psychologists have long recognized that choice complexity can affect decision-making outcomes. One result is procrastination--individuals put off decision making as choices become more complicated.") (Internal citations omitted.) Return to text 21. See, e.g., Dean S. Karlan, et al, " Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Savings ," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16205, (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2010). See, e.g., Jialan Wang and Benjamin J. Keys, "Perverse Nudges: Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards," Penn Wharton Public Policy Initiative Issue Brief, vol. 2. no. 4 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, April 2014), https://publicpolicy.wharton.upenn.edu/issue-brief/v2n4.php. Return to text 22. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF) ," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice). Return to text 23. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016 (PDF) , (Washington, Board of Governors, March 2016). The survey found that 40 percent of the unbanked population and 70 percent of the underbanked and banked populations had access to a smartphone. Return to text 24. See Bank of America, Trends in Consumer Mobility Report , 2015, http://newsroom.bankofamerica.com/files/doc_library/additional/2015_BAC_Trends_in_Consumer_Mobility_Report.pdf. (Finding that 35 percent of survey respondents reported that they reach for their mobile devices first thing, as compared to 10 percent for their significant other.) Return to text 25. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016 (PDF) . Return to text 26. Id. Return to text 27. See, e.g., Blair Hanley Frank, "Meet Google's Cool New Natural Language Tool, Parsey McParseface," Computerworld , May 12, 2016, www.computerworld.com/article/3070059/artificial-intelligence/meet-googles-cool-new-natural-language-tool-parsey-mcparseface.html. See also Google Research Blog, "TensorFlow--Google's Latest Machine Learning System, Open Sourced for Everyone," November 9, 2015, https://research.googleblog.com/2015/11/tensorflow-googles-latest-machine_9.html. Cf. Tom Simonite, "Facebook Quietly Enters Starcraft War for AI Bots, and Loses," Wired , October 9, 2017, www.wired.com/story/facebook-quietly-enters-starcraft-war-for-ai-bots-and-loses/. Return to text 28. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF) ," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice). Return to text 29. See, e.g., Envestnet Yodlee, "Envestnet Yodlee Unveils Personal Financial Wellness Solution Powered by Data Intelligence," news release, June 12, 2017, www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/envestnet--yodlee-unveils-personal-financial-wellness-solution-powered-by-data-intelligence-300472018.html. Return to text 30. See, e.g., Brett Theodos, et al., An Evaluation of the Impacts and Implementation Approach of Financial Coaching Programs (PDF) (Washington: Urban Institute, October 2015). Return to text 31. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF) (Washington: CFPB, December 2015). Return to text 32. Trevor Bakker, Nicole Kelly, Jesse Leary, and Eva Nagypal, Data Point: Checking Account Overdraft (PDF) , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report (Washington: CFPB, July 2014). Likewise, one out of five new payday loans are rolled over six times or more. Kathleen Burke, Jonathan Lanning, Jesse Leary, and Jialan Wang, Data Point: Payday Lending (PDF) , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report (Washington: CFPB, March 2014). Return to text 33. See, e.g., Phil Patton, "Buy Here, and We'll Tell You What You Like," New York Times , September 22, 1999, https://partners.nytimes.com/library/tech/99/09/biztech/technology/22patt.html?mcubz=1. Return to text 34. See, e.g., John Lanchester, "You Are the Product," London Review of Books , vol. 39, no. 16-17, August 17, 2017, www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n16/john-lanchester/you-are-the-product. Cf., Monica Anderson, "Key Takeaways on Mobile Apps and Privacy," Pew Research Center FactTank , November 10, 2015, www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/11/10/key-takeaways-mobile-apps/ . Return to text 35. See, e.g., Nathaniel Popper, "Automated Assistants Will Soon Make a Bid for Your Finances," New York Times , December 7, 2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/business/dealbook/automated-assistants-will-soon-make-a-bid-for-your-finances.html. Return to text 36. Cf., Federal Trade Commission, " Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF) ," n.4, June 24, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, " FTC Consumer Protection Staff Update Agency's Guidance to Search Engine Industry on the Need to Distinguish Between Advertisements and Search Results ," press release, June 25, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, " Commercial Alert Response Letter ," June 27, 2002. Return to text 37. Cf., Federal Trade Commission, " Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF) ," n.4, June 24, 2013. Return to text 38. Cf., Federal Trade Commission, " The FTC's Endorsement Guides: What People Are Asking ," September 2017, " .com Disclosures: How to Make Effective Disclosures in Digital Advertising (PDF) ," March 2013. Return to text 39. See, e.g., Finicity, "Finicity and Wells Fargo Ink Data Exchange Deal," press release, April 4, 2017, www.finicity.com/press-release-finicity-wells-fargo-ink-data-exchange-deal/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Intuit Signs New Data-Exchange Agreement with Wells Fargo," press release, February 3, 2017, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2017/intuit-agreement_0203/; Intuit, "Chase, Intuit to Give Customers Greater Control of Their Information," press release, January 25, 2017, www.intuit.com/company/press-room/press-releases/2017/Chase-Intuit-to-Give-Customers-Greater-Control-of-Their-Information/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Wells Fargo, Xero Agree on New Data-Exchange Method," press release, June 7, 2016, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2016/new-dataexchange-method_0607/; Silicon Valley Bank, "Xero and Silicon Valley Bank Partner to Offer Innovative Companies Next-Generation Financial Management," press release, July 16, 2014, www.svb.com/News/Company-News/Xero-and-Silicon-Valley-Bank-Partner-to-Offer-Innovative-Companies-Next-Generation-Financial-Management/. Return to text 40. See, e.g., Penny Crosman, "Data-Sharing Debate Grows Contentious as Fintechs Vent Grievances," American Banker , August 15, 2017, www.americanbanker.com/news/data-sharing-debate-grows-contentious-as-fintechs-vent-grievances. Return to text 41. See 12 CFR section 1005.2(m) (1). (Excluding from the definition of "unauthorized electronic fund transfer" any "electronic fund transfer initiated… [by] a person who was furnished the access device to the consumer's account by the consumer…..") Return to text 42. Comment 2(m)-2 clarifies that if "a consumer furnishes an access device and grants authority to make transfers to a person . . . who exceeds the authority given, the consumer is fully liable for the transfers unless the consumer has notified the financial institution that transfers by that person are no longer authorized." Return to text 43. See Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland, Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing (Washington: Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017). ("There are differing interpretations of how regulations, such as the OCC's Third Party Risk Management guidance, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act's privacy and safeguard rules, and Regulation E liability limits, should be applied to data sharing between financial institutions and third parties like data aggregators and financial technology applications.") See also JPMorgan Chase, "How You Can Protect Yourself," (last visited October 18, 2017), www.chase.com/digital/resources/privacy-security/security/how-you-can-protect>; Liz Weston, "Why Banks Want You to Drop Mint, Other 'Aggregators,'" Reuters , November 9, 2015, www.reuters.com/article/us-column-weston-banks/why-banks-want-you-to-drop-mint-other-aggregators-idUSKCN0SY2GC20151109. Return to text 44. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF) ," SR letter 13-19/CA letter 13-21, December 5, 2013. Return to text 45. See, e.g., American Express, "Introducing the Amex Skill for Amazon Alexa" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.americanexpress.com/us/content/alexa/.; Leena Rao, "American Express Debuts Its First Amazon Alexa Skill," Fortune , May 11, 2017, http://fortune.com/2017/05/11/american-express-alexa-skill/; Capital One, "CapitalOne is on Amazon Echo" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.capitalone.com/applications/alexa/. Return to text 46. See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, " Consumer Protection Principles: Consumer-Authorized Financial Data Sharing and Aggregation (PDF) ," October 18, 2017; Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland, Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing , Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017. Return to text 47. Cf. Kaitlin Asrow and Beth Brockland, Liability, Transparency and Consumer Control in Data Sharing , Center for Financial Services Innovation, September 18, 2017. Return to text 48. See, e.g., Penny Crosman, "Data-Sharing Debate Grows Contentious as Fintechs Vent Grievances," American Banker, August 15, 2017, www.americanbanker.com/news/data-sharing-debate-grows-contentious-as-fintechs-vent-grievances. Return to text 49. Envestnet, Inc., Form 10-K, March 17, 2017, www.envestnet.com/report/2016/download/Envestnet-2016AnnualReport-Form10-K.pdf. Return to text Last Update: November 16, 2017 Back to Top
