Systematic Policy and Forward Guidance Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc. Down Town Association New York, NY March 25, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Systematic Policy and Forward Guidance Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc. Down Town Association New York, NY March 25, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Plosser highlights the relationship between systematic monetary policy and forward guidance. His goal is to help underscore how a systematic approach to monetary policy can improve the effectiveness of monetary policy in both normal times and in more unusual or extreme circumstances, such as when policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. • President Plosser’s preference for dealing with forward guidance is for the FOMC to articulate a reaction function as best it can. This entails describing a systematic approach to policymaking, where policy decisions are based on available information in a consistent and predictable way. • President Plosser believes the most recent FOMC statement took a step in this direction when it moved to a qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that the Committee will be assessing progress – both realized and expected – toward its policy objectives. Introduction I want to thank William Kanto and the Money Marketeers for inviting me to speak again this evening. Your series of guest speakers over the years has been quite illustrious, and it has included many Federal Reserve governors and presidents, not to mention distinguished economists and a wide array of others. So, before I share some thoughts on monetary policy with you tonight, I will begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Of course, that disclaimer is a two-way street, and you should not necessarily associate the views of my colleagues with my views. 2 I believe that this diversity of views among FOMC participants does more than assure variety among your guest speakers. It is one of the great strengths of our decentralized central bank. Open dialogue and diversity of views leads to better policy decisions and is the primary means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated into our monetary policy framework. Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of thoughtful progress. As I noted in 2009 when I last spoke to you, the famous American journalist Walter Lippmann once said, “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much.” Tonight I would like to focus on a particular aspect of current monetary policy that has been a source of much discussion and debate – forward guidance – that is, the practice of providing information on the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. Forward guidance has taken on greater significance since the FOMC lowered the target federal funds rate to essentially zero more than five years ago. Facing this zero lower bound constraint on its primary policy instrument, the FOMC has been attempting to implement monetary policy, in part, by influencing expectations of future policy. The logic for this approach derives from the important role expectations play in shaping economic outcomes. If monetary policy can affect those expectations in specific ways, it can influence current economic conditions. The approach I want to take in my discussion is to highlight the relationship between such forward guidance and systematic monetary policy. By systematic, I mean setting policy in a rule-like or largely predictable manner in response to changes in economic conditions. Forward guidance and systematic monetary policy are closely related. Understanding this relationship can provide insights into effective monetary policy in both normal times and in more unusual or extreme circumstances, such as when policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. So, I will begin with a brief review of the benefits of systematic policy. I will highlight why I think most academic economists have concluded that conducting monetary policy in a rule-like manner is preferable to regimes that are more discretionary. 3 Systematic Policy For someone my age, it doesn’t seem all that long ago when it was taken for granted that central banking was supposed to be mysterious and secretive — the less said about monetary policy the better. Indeed, it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to publicly announce the policy changes made at an FOMC meeting. Up until then, the markets were left to infer the policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market.1 But times have most definitely changed. Transparency has replaced secrecy, and open communications have replaced mystery. While there are those who long for those thrilling days of yesteryear when central bankers said little and communicated even less, I don’t think we can turn back the clock — nor should we. Economic science has come a long way in the past 30 years, and one of the most important developments has been the recognition of the important role that expectations play in understanding economic outcomes. This is particularly evident in financial markets, where investment decisions and the valuation of securities depend on assessments of future economic outcomes. But this is also true for individuals buying homes and businesses making capital investments. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If policymakers can reduce uncertainty about the course of monetary policy, the economy is likely to perform more efficiently. Thus, monetary policy that is more systematic and predictable can reduce expectational errors and contribute to a more stable and efficiently functioning economy. This recognition of the important role played by expectations has led many academics and policymakers to stress the importance of credibility and commitment to well-articulated monetary policy objectives. It has also led to extensive research on monetary policy rules that can enhance the predictability of policy. In fact, virtually all of the mainstream macroeconomic 1 See the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “Timeline to Transparency,” www.philadelphiafed.org/about -the- fed/transparency/ (accessed March 22, 2014). 4 models are built upon the presumption that monetary policy is conducted in a rule-like manner that is well understood by all agents in the economy. In their Nobel Prize-winning work, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott demonstrated that a credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic, rule-like manner over time leads to better outcomes than discretion.2 In monetary policy, less discretionary behavior and a commitment to a more systematic approach have been shown to lead to more economic stability – lower and less volatile inflation and less volatile output. Yet, the science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the optimal rule for setting monetary policy and turn decisions over to a computer. Judgment is still required. Moreover, optimal rules, that is, those that maximize economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they are derived. For example, the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. In addition, optimal rules can often be quite complex, thus making them difficult to implement and to communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. However, these limitations to implementing optimal policy rules should not prevent us from adopting a systematic approach to the conduct of policy. There has been a great deal of progress in identifying simple, robust rules that appear to perform well in a variety of models and environments. Such robust rules can form a basis for developing more systematic, rule-like policymaking. This rule-like approach does not mean one can know the future or what future policy decisions will be. You often hear policymakers speak of policy as being data dependent, and indeed, it is. But the data should feed into a systematic decision-making process so that policy will be similar in similar environments. One way to think about this systematic part of policy is as a reaction function with parameters that are largely stable over time. 2 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp. 473–91. 5 One important and desirable characteristic of such a reaction function is that it can be easily articulated to the public. This greatly improves the transparency and predictability of monetary policy, which reduces surprises. Everyone is more informed about the course of monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances. The most well-known simple rule is that proposed by John Taylor in 1993.3 The Taylor rule calls for setting the nominal fed funds rate based on three factors. The first represents the economy’s long-run real interest rate, perhaps the steady-state real interest rate, plus the Fed’s target rate of inflation. This is sometimes referred to as the normal, or neutral, nominal rate of interest. The second factor is a function of the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target or goal. If inflation is above the target, the Taylor rule says the funds rate should be higher, and if it is below target, the funds rate should be lower. The third element in the Taylor rule calls for an adjustment of the funds rate to departures of real GDP from some measure of “potential” GDP. Simply put, when GDP is below “potential,” the funds rate should be reduced, and when it is above, it should increase. I will point out that our recent thresholds did not provide a reaction function. They simply suggested a range of economic conditions under which we would not act. They conveyed nothing about our actions in other states of the economy. In my view, this was one of the major drawbacks to the approach and the reason changes were needed. Over the past 20 years, the Taylor rule has garnered a great deal of attention and study. Many variations have been proposed and their properties investigated. Almost all the simple rules that have been found to be robust over a range of models have very similar constructions and can be expressed as variants of Taylor’s original specification. Of course, the Fed has never 3 John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, North- Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 6 adopted a formal reaction function or simple rule for setting monetary policy. But the FOMC does look at the implications of various rules for interest rates when it makes its policy decisions. The fact that the FOMC has not adopted a formal reaction function might reflect the desire for discretion on the part of some policymakers. But it also reflects the difficulty in reaching a consensus. The Committee is composed of 19 members with varying views about how the economy functions, the shocks affecting the economy, and how policy should be set to meet the FOMC’s monetary policy goals. Despite not having formally adopted a particular rule, the Fed appeared to behave in a systematic way at various times in the past. Indeed, Taylor’s 1993 article noted that his rule approximated Federal Reserve policy setting over the 1987–1992 period, save for a deviation during the stock market crash of 1987. I believe that despite the challenges, there would be large benefits to the FOMC reaching a consensus on a reaction function that could serve as a useful guide to understanding its behavior. Those benefits would be in the form of increased transparency and in the alignment of the public’s expectations with policymakers’ intentions. As I’ve discussed before, there are limitations to the use of simple rules, and no central bank can be constrained by one simple rule in all circumstances. Rules are basically intended to work well on average, but any central bank looks at many variables in determining policy. There will be times when policy must deviate from a reaction function or policy rule. However, simple rules do provide valuable benchmarks for assessing the appropriate stance of policy. They also provide guidance about the likely path of policy and thus are intended to reduce volatility. However, this outcome cannot happen unless the central bank is willing to publicly communicate a reaction function or rule. Another benefit of articulating a rule is enhanced accountability. There will inevitably be times when economic developments fall outside the scope of our models and warrant unusual monetary policy action. Events such as 9/11, the Asian financial crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from the simple rule. 7 Having articulated a rule guiding policymaking in normal times, the policymaker will be expected to explain the departures from the rule in these unusual circumstances. With the rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform us how excessively tight or easy policy might be relative to normal. If the events are temporary, policymakers will have to explain how and when policy is likely to return to normal. Thus, I see several benefits to the FOMC reaching a consensus on a reaction function or policy rule, including aligning expectations for policy and enhancing transparency and accountability of the policymaking process. Forward Guidance One way to think about the policy reaction function is as a form of forward guidance. Indeed, it is perhaps the best and most useful form of forward guidance. In normal times, forward guidance provides the public with information about the expected path of policy. As I’ve discussed, forward guidance is a form of transparency that reduces volatility by reducing policy uncertainty relative to discretionary decision-making. However, with the policy rate at or near zero, forward guidance can play a role in increasing the degree of accommodation. When the policy rate is constrained by the zero lower bound, the future policy rate becomes potentially more important than the current policy rate in influencing current economic conditions through its impact on expectations. In some models, when faced with the zero lower bound, it can be desirable to indicate that future policy rates will be kept lower for longer than might otherwise be the case. 4 Thus, policymakers may want to deliberately commit to deviating from what they would otherwise choose to do under normal conditions, such as following a Taylor-like rule or their normal reaction function. In these models, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long- run nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. 4 Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 2003, pp. 139–211. 8 This use of forward guidance asks more of policymakers than just articulating a reaction function. In a sense, it requires more of a commitment from policymakers; it requires them to commit to a future path that will not be time consistent if policymakers were only forward looking. Instead, policymakers need to commit to a policy path that is history dependent. As I noted, you can think of this as a commitment to deviate from a prior reaction function, particularly if that reaction function makes no provision for operating at the zero lower bound. If such a commitment can be made credible, it can yield better economic outcomes. But managing the public’s beliefs about the future policy path is challenging if policymakers must convince the public that they will not behave as they have in the past. And I would argue that that is the circumstance that the FOMC faces.5 Managing expectations is even more challenging when policymakers have not been clear about the reaction function they use in normal times. How can policymakers credibly commit to deviate from something they have never committed to in the first place? How can policymakers convey that they will be implementing policy that is more accommodative than normal when they have not been clear about what would constitute the normal degree of accommodation? Managing the public’s expectations may be not only difficult but also counterproductive. Without the public’s understanding of policymaking in normal times, trying to pursue a commitment to looser-than-normal policy may send the wrong signal. For example, if the public hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret the message as policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If this is the interpretation, then the forward guidance will weaken rather than strengthen current spending. 5 This would not be the case if the reaction function or rule explicitly described how policy would be conducted at the zero lower bound. In that case, new forward guidance would not be required, as the reaction function would have already notified the public what to expect. 9 Where Do We Go from Here? My preference for dealing with forward guidance is for the FOMC to articulate a reaction function as best it can. This entails describing a systematic approach to policymaking where policy decisions are based on available information in a consistent and predictable way. I believe the most recent FOMC statement took a step in this direction when we moved to a qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that we will be assessing progress – both realized and expected – toward our policy objectives. The idea that policy will change as we approach our objectives has the flavor of a reaction function. But, of course, there is more work to do. Because we do not know the true model of the economy, I would suggest the Committee begin by considering a set of robust policy rules designed to have good results in a variety of models and across various stages of the business cycle. Such robust rules recognize that data are measured imprecisely and are subject to revision. These robust rules typically indicate that policy should respond to changes in the gap between inflation and the inflation goal, and to changes in the deviation of output from a measure of potential output, or to changes in unemployment from the steady-state or the natural rate of unemployment. Most robust rules suggest that the reaction to the changes in the inflation gap be more than one-for-one and should exceed the reaction to changes in the output or unemployment gap. The rules also suggest that policy should be somewhat inertial. By recognizing the fundamental difficulty in measuring potential output or the natural rate of unemployment, I think a good case can be made to consider rules that rely on the growth of output or changes in the unemployment rate or employment growth. I want to stress that these rules suggest that policy should respond to changes in the output or unemployment gap not because policy is seeking to fine-tune the real economy but because doing so allows the economy to efficiently use resources given the economic disturbances that it experiences. 10 By considering such robust rules, the FOMC might be able to move toward a consensus on a qualitative description of its reaction function as an important first step. For example, we would not have to specify the precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change in terms of how the variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the public will form more accurate judgments about the likely course of policy – thereby reducing uncertainty and promoting stability. The FOMC has kept the federal funds rate at effectively zero since December 2008. For much of this time, interest rate rules suggested that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates was constraining policy; in other words, that nominal rates should be negative if that were possible. However, many robust rules now suggest that given the progress the economy has made over the past year, policy either is no longer constrained or will soon not be constrained by the zero bound. That is, they indicate that the policy rate should be above zero. Rule-based policymaking would require the FOMC to indicate how it plans to adjust policy to a more normal stance. The Committee could decide to simply follow the prescriptions offered by the reaction function. Or instead, the Committee might decide that normalization will be delayed with a more gradual adjustment of rates relative to the prescriptions of the reaction function. But even if the FOMC were not prepared to choose a particular rule, it could articulate more clearly a qualitative reaction function that would serve as a baseline for future changes in policy as we exit the zero lower bound. It is my belief that doing so would be a more understandable form of forward guidance, less subject to misinterpretation as policy transitions from unusual times to more normal times.

Simplicity, Transparency, and Market Discipline in Regulatory Reform “Enhancing Prudential Standards in Financial Regulations” Cohosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Wharton Financial Institutions Center, and the Journal of Financial Services Research Philadelphia, PA April 8, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Simplicity, Transparency, and Market Discipline in Regulatory Reform “Enhancing Prudential Standards in Financial Regulations” Cohosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Wharton Financial Institutions Center, and the Journal of Financial Services Research Philadelphia, PA April 8, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights  President Plosser believes simple regulations are easier for financial firms to follow, increase the likelihood that supervisors will consistently enforce them, and are more likely to foster financial stability.  President Plosser argues that revealing more information about an individual firm’s risk will reduce the likelihood of contagion and runs because such events are generally a result of a lack of information, rather than too much information.  President Plosser continues to advocate for a new bankruptcy mechanism suitable for all financial firms, whether systemically important or not, because it would restore the incentives of market participants and creditors, in particular, to monitor risk taking by these institutions. Introduction I am delighted to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. We are very pleased to partner with the Wharton School and the Journal of Financial Services Research in this joint conference on “Enhancing Prudential Standards in Financial Regulations.” I want to acknowledge and thank the organizers for assembling such a distinguished group of academics and practitioners to discuss the ongoing efforts to improve our financial system. I am going to take advantage of my role as host to offer some of my own thoughts on financial regulations and financial stability. I will present a high-level perspective of the subject. I don’t plan to let the messy details get in the way of lofty thoughts. Instead, I believe it is helpful to step back from the complicated details of financial regulation to think more broadly about the goals and objectives of reform and the strategies that might best get us there. Of course, these views are my own and should not be interpreted as representing the Federal Reserve System. 2 I think we all agree that financial markets and intermediaries play an important economic role by pooling funds from savers and investors and allocating these resources to their most productive uses. Such allocations require financial intermediaries to assess and price various risky claims. They then can sell some of the risks, either duration or credit risk, to investors and others who are willing to bear that risk. Thus, intermediaries help allocate resources and risks throughout the economy, thereby improving efficiency and productivity. At times, however, financial intermediation can result in risks becoming concentrated in ways that increase rather than reduce the fragility of the financial system more broadly. This is what many people mean when they refer to systemic risk. While today I will use the term in this fashion, I would note that the concept is quite vague. One of the major difficulties we face in managing systemic risk is defining what it is and how to measure it. Ideally, one important goal of financial supervision and regulation is to monitor risk in the financial system and reduce the chances that it inadvertently leads to financial fragility or instability. Regulation, however, should seek to do so without impeding the healthy functioning of financial markets and institutions. In response to the financial crisis, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act in 2010, which included enhanced capital and liquidity standards and risk-management requirements for large financial institutions thought to be systemically important. In addition to new regulations, the crisis brought about important changes in supervision. Supervisors are taking a macroprudential approach to their responsibilities. Rather than focusing on the risk in a single institution, supervisors are spending more time analyzing risks across firms. Large financial firms are now required to have stronger data and information systems so they can better monitor and manage their own risks. And these firms are required to report higher quality data to supervisors. The Federal Reserve now utilizes these data as well 3 as other information it receives to conduct more in-depth and timely assessments of emerging risks. Access to better data has also enabled supervisors to conduct the supervisory stress tests required by Dodd-Frank, which assess the ability of these large institutions to withstand a severe economic downturn. This conference will address the efficacy of many of these individual elements of Dodd-Frank and of supervisory reforms, which are still evolving nearly four years after the legislation was first enacted. For the remainder of my remarks, I wish to explore three broad principles that I believe we need to consider as we search for ways to improve the stability of our financial system. The first is simplicity. Our regulatory framework is becoming increasingly complex, which has led to rising compliance costs as well as enforcement costs. The second principle is transparency. Financial markets and instruments have also become increasingly complex and in some cases occasionally opaque. Ensuring that financial instruments and firms are sufficiently transparent can contribute to greater efficiency and awareness of risks exposures. The third principle I will stress is the role that market forces can play in effectively controlling risk-taking and enhancing supervision. Simplicity Let me begin with simplicity. The financial world has become very complex and so has financial regulation. It is easy to claim that complex regulation is necessitated by the increasing complexity of the financial markets. After all, regulations are, in part, shaped by evolving market structures. In some cases, new regulations arise in response to a crisis or a perceived failure of some kind. Unfortunately, markets often evolve faster than the regulations; detailed rule writing that underlies much of the complex regulation can become obsolete, which then requires more rule writing. Yet, we should consider that causality can work both ways. Regulations themselves give rise to incentives to evade the rules. Such regulatory arbitrage can result in increasingly complex financial structures designed to fall outside existing rules. This activity then begets more 4 complex rules that markets once again seek to avoid. Consider the increasing complexity and granularity of the Basel risk-weighting classifications. The logic of assessing capital requirements based on the risk of an institution’s assets is sensible in principle; however, it creates incentives for institutions to structure assets in ways that minimize the use of capital, perhaps resulting in risks that become hidden in opaque or complex structures that are not addressed by specific rules or classifications found in the Basel framework. Such a cycle of increasing complexity raises both compliance costs and enforcement costs. Thus, I believe, there is merit in developing simpler, more transparent regulatory solutions designed to work reasonably well in a wide range of situations. For example, higher capital requirements based on the leverage ratio, as opposed to overly complex risk-weighting schemes, might lower both compliance and enforcement costs while achieving similar or better outcomes in terms of the safety and soundness of individual institutions as well as overall financial stability. Moreover, there are examples of how market participants’ reactions to regulation may have contributed to the recent financial crisis. For instance, the expansion of the shadow banking system was in many ways a result of attempts to circumvent regulations placed on banking institutions. Similarly, the use of bond ratings in setting bank capital requirements for securities holdings or in making eligible certain structured products for various investment purposes created incentives to inflate ratings of collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs, and other structured products backed by subprime mortgages. Consider bankruptcy rules that exempt overnight swaps and repurchase agreements from the traditional stays when a company files for bankruptcy. Such rules reduce the incentive for lenders to monitor counterparty risk and thus effectively lower the relative cost of using short-term funding to finance an intermediary’s or investment firm’s balance sheet. As we know, the reliance on short-term funding from sources totally immune from counterparty risk can contribute to increasing risks of contagion and runs on financial institutions. 5 Increased regulatory complexity can make consistent enforcement of the rules more difficult. Inconsistent enforcement can make it harder for financial institutions to predict how regulators are likely to behave. Such uncertainty can make the financial system less efficient and can undermine the credibility of the regulatory regime, thereby making the regime less effective in fostering financial stability. In contrast, simple regulations are easier for financial firms to follow, increase the likelihood that supervisors will consistently enforce them, and are therefore more likely to have the desired effect. Transparency Next, let me turn to transparency. Economists for the most part think transparency is a good thing, and I am no exception. I will talk about transparency from two perspectives. The first is transparency regarding financial institutions and financial products. The second is transparency by regulators. As is true of financial regulations, financial instruments have become increasingly complex, whether due to market demands or incentives created by regulation. Whatever the reason, it is entirely appropriate to require adequate disclosure and transparency regarding the structure and risk of both the instruments and the institutions. Such transparency allows markets to better price the inherent risks of the securities and the firms. So put me in the camp of more disclosure and transparency. But just as markets can use information on securities and firms to improve market prices and assess risk exposures, markets are also likely to find value in regulatory information. As a bank regulator, the Federal Reserve gets a detailed view of how large financial institutions measure and manage risk. Banks and supervisors now use a host of sophisticated models and techniques to assess risks. There has been a long debate about the potential costs and benefits of releasing some regulatory information once treated as confidential. Many policymakers now believe that 6 public disclosure of additional information concerning the financial condition, risk exposures, and supervisory assessments of firms would be beneficial to financial stability. Greater transparency would enable market participants to better assess the risks of counterparties and thereby exert more effective market discipline. Increased transparency about supervisory practices would also allow financial firms to have greater confidence about the “rules of the road.” This would reduce regulatory uncertainty and the inefficiencies of regulatory arbitrage as firms try to guess what’s on the minds of regulators. When firms have a better understanding of regulatory requirements, they can appropriately evaluate the economic costs and benefits of their decisions. Of course, there are concerns that too much transparency can have unintended consequences. The added information could lead to instability by creating runs on financial institutions if market participants misunderstand or overreact to negative news. Increased transparency might reduce the quality and quantity of information that financial firms would share with regulators. While these concerns may be legitimate, I would argue that revealing more information about individual firms will reduce the likelihood of contagion and runs, as such events generally arise from a lack of information, rather than too much information, about the riskiness of an individual firm. Market Discipline The final principle I would like to stress is the role of market discipline. I believe that market discipline can be a powerful tool in controlling the risk-taking of financial institutions. Notice that transparency is an important ingredient in effective market discipline, since a more informed market is likely to function more efficiently and set the prices of securities and firms more accurately. As we seek to improve and strengthen financial stability, we should think about mechanisms to make market forces more effective, not just write rules that attempt to substitute for market 7 forces. Creating incentives for markets to monitor and price risk-taking by financial institutions, rather than have markets simply assume that regulators have monitored the risk for them, is a desirable outcome. A complex and nontransparent regulatory regime can create its own form of moral hazard. Thus, efforts to enhance the effectiveness of market discipline are beneficial as they reduce the necessity of rules and interventions that can create perverse or unintended consequences and the potential for moral hazard. As one example of how regulation could harness market forces to promote financial stability, some have proposed that financial institutions be required to issue subordinated debt. Owners of subordinated debt have a strong incentive to monitor risk-taking by these firms, as they are last in line in the event of failure. Others and I have argued for contingent debt that would convert to capital, in response to specific market triggers indicating that the firm was under stress. Such automatic recapitalization would help prevent firms from failing in the first place. Managers would have a strong incentive to avoid taking on risks that might lead to such events, as they would dramatically dilute existing shareholders. Another way markets can aid supervision is through the information they can provide to supervisors. Markets aggregate many risk assessments into a single measure, such as the price or quantity traded of a security. These market measures can be compared across institutions to provide an indication of relative risk. The measures can also be monitored over time to provide indications of changes in risk. Market participants have strong financial incentives to correctly price a firm’s risk. Since market prices of securities tend to be forward-looking, they reflect investors’ expectations given the current information. There are several examples of how market signals could be incorporated into the regulatory process. For instance, if financial firms were required to issue subordinated debt, as I have just discussed, supervisors could monitor a bank’s subordinated debt spreads for indications of emerging risk and take appropriate actions in response. This strategy is supported by evidence that subordinated debt spreads do increase with the risk profile of the issuers. 8 Others have argued for using credit default swap spreads or market-based capital measures in the supervisory process. In particular, the Federal Reserve has proposed using market signals in establishing thresholds for “early remediation” under the Dodd-Frank Act. The argument for greater use of market data in bank supervision is not that market signals are always superior to supervisory assessments, but that market data can complement information gathered by examiners. There is still much to learn about how best to combine market data with examiner data to improve supervisory assessments of risk in the financial system, and additional research in this area could prove highly useful. Of course, if we want to effectively leverage market discipline, then we have to address the problem of too big to fail. If creditors perceive they will be rescued, then market discipline is undermined and moral hazard will lead to greater risk-taking by the institutions. It is important to recognize that the moral hazard problem is not mitigated by eliminating the potential for government support. It doesn’t matter where the money comes from to rescue creditors. Any means of providing an implicit or explicit subsidy to protect creditors undermines market discipline and creates moral hazard. Without an effective and credible resolution regime that ensures no subsidies to creditors, there is less incentive for markets to monitor a firm’s risk – thus, the firm’s risk would not be accurately reflected in security prices. Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act expanded the existing authority of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to resolve failing banks including those that are deemed systemically important. While the objective is to end too big to fail, I have argued that the reforms as currently envisioned are unlikely to do so. The expansive discretionary power given to the FDIC under Title II could make it vulnerable to political pressure regarding the bailout of individual institutions or creditors. Keep in mind that Title II resolution is triggered only when there are concerns about systemic risks. The discretionary aspect of Title II could cause creditors to perceive that their payoffs would be determined through a regulatory resolution process, in 9 which political pressure can be brought to bear, independent of the rule of law. Some have suggested that there be a tax on the financial industry to provide support for the resolution scheme proposed by the FDIC. While this may get the taxpayer off the hook, it does not solve the too-big-to-fail problem. On a number of occasions, I have advocated a new bankruptcy mechanism suitable for all financial firms, whether systemically important or not, to alleviate most of the potential problems caused by the discretionary and targeted nature of Title II.1 A bankruptcy process tailored for financial institutions would restore the incentives of market participants and creditors, in particular, to monitor risk taking by these institutions. I find this a more appealing and effective path to ending too big to fail. Conclusion To conclude, simplicity and transparency are important principles to enhance prudential standards in financial regulations and financial stability. Simple, transparent regulatory mechanisms make it easier for market participants to predict how regulators are likely to behave. This, in turn, makes it easier for regulators to credibly commit to implementing the regulations in a consistent manner, thereby increasing the effectiveness of the regulatory regime. An increased role for simple regulatory mechanisms that are harder to evade – and even better, mechanisms that utilize market forces to discipline firm behavior – is superior to an ever- expanding list of complex rules that seeks to cover every possible outcome. In many circumstances, simpler and more transparent regulatory approaches, that also enhance the effectiveness of market discipline, can better achieve financial stability while maintaining a dynamic financial system that meets the needs of our economy. 1 See Charles Plosser, “Reducing Financial Fragility by Ending Too Big to Fail,” speech before the Eighth Annual Finance Conference, Boston College Carroll School of Management , Boston, MA, June 6, 2013.

Communication and Transparency in the Conduct of Monetary Policy Council on Foreign Relations New York, NY May 8, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Communication and Transparency in the Conduct of Monetary Policy Council on Foreign Relations New York, NY May 8, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Plosser outlines his views that policy transparency and forward guidance could be enhanced if the central bank would be more explicit about its reaction function. • President Plosser notes that one way to be more explicit would be to indicate the likely behavior of the policy rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with past conduct of monetary policy and are robust to our uncertainties regarding the true economic model. • President Plosser believes that the Federal Reserve Board staff’s model, called FRB/US, seems to be a reasonable starting point for providing economic forecasts based on those rule-based policies. Introduction Thank you for the kind introduction. It’s a pleasure to return to the Council on Foreign Relations. I know that the value of these sessions often arises during the discussion, so I will try to keep my opening remarks brief. Before I go any further, though, I should begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The topic I want to address today is communication and transparency in the conduct of monetary policy. Some of you can recall when it was taken for granted that the central bank was supposed to be secretive and mysterious. The guiding principle was simple: The less said about monetary policy, the better. Indeed, it was not until 1994 that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began to announce policy changes made at its meetings. 2 But times have changed. Transparency has replaced secrecy, and open communication has replaced mystery. The extent of this transformation is, in many ways, remarkable. Today, the issues of communication and transparency are front and center on the agenda of many meetings and conferences on central banking. A major reason for the focus on these issues is the recognition that the stance of monetary policy encompasses not just the current level of the short-term policy rate but its expected future path as well. More broadly, economists have come to understand that expectations, including expectations about monetary policy, play an important role in determining economic outcomes, such as real economic growth and inflation. One element of communication that has received a good deal of attention is forward guidance. Forward guidance is central bankers’ speak for communication about the future course of monetary policy, and particularly about the likely path of the short-term policy rate. One reason for this increased attention on the future path of policy is that short-term rates have been constrained by the zero lower bound. So when, or under what conditions, the nominal policy rate might eventually rise takes on greater significance. However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent tool of policy. Its effectiveness is intimately related to other features of monetary policy. In particular, a credible, systematic approach to policy and the general openness and transparency of the policy process are essential elements in shaping expectations. Even with this recognition, there are various views about how best to communicate information about the intended path of policy and how to ensure that such information is credible. If it is not credible, then it will not shape expectations in a beneficial way. More generally, a central bank can and often does communicate on a host of important issues, including its view of the current state of the economy, its assessment of risks, and its outlook for key economic variables. Perhaps most important, from my perspective, is communication about how the evolution of key economic variables systematically shapes current and future policy decisions. 3 In my remarks this morning, I want to stress the importance of the FOMC articulating such a systematic approach to policy. Doing so is likely to make forward guidance more effective, by helping the public to better interpret what that guidance means. The Benefits of Systematic Monetary Policy So what do I mean by a systematic approach to policy? Quite simply, I mean conducting policy in a more rule-like manner. The antithesis of such rule-like behavior, of course, is discretion; that is, policymaking conducted period by period with great latitude to take whatever actions seem best at the time. The rules-versus-discretion debate in economics is an old one, dating back at least to Henry Simons in 1936.1 Yet, following the Nobel Prize-winning work of Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott in 1977, most academic economists — but, unfortunately, far fewer policymakers — have come to accept the benefits of adhering to rule-like behavior in monetary policy.2 These benefits arise, in part, because consumers and businesses are forward looking, and credible commitments concerning the determinants of the future path of policy can alter expectations in ways that make policy more effective and less uncertain. The ability to behave systematically and to align the public’s expectations with that systematic behavior can allow the central bank to increase current economic activity, while simultaneously lowering inflation. But a credible commitment to honor past promises is an essential element of rule-like policy. Discretionary decision-making undermines such commitments. The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on the state of the economy. That is, policymakers should describe the reaction function that determines how the current and future policy rate will be set depending on the state of the 1 Henry C. Simons, “Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 44:1 (January 1936). 2 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91. 4 economy. Policymakers are, of course, no more certain about future economic conditions than anyone else is, and therefore cannot realistically commit to particular future values of the policy rate. Nonetheless, describing a reaction function or rule that explains how the policy rate will be determined in the future as a function of economic conditions can be highly informative. Unfortunately, the science of monetary policy has not reached the point where we can specify a rule for setting policy and turn decision-making over to a computer. Judgment is still required. Nevertheless, I place a great deal of importance on systematic behavior both as prescription for good policy and in terms of my own policy deliberations. Much study has been done on various rules, but the most well-known rule is attributable to John Taylor.3 The Taylor rule is a reaction function that indicates how to set the policy rate as a function of deviations of inflation from the inflation target and some measure of economic slack. The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. The reality is that Taylor-like rules yield very good results in a variety of theoretical settings. While this is surprising to some, it is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule delivers good outcomes in a variety of models means that these simple, robust rules can provide useful guidance for policy. Systematic policies that provide important information about the policymakers’ reaction function combined with other information, such as the policymakers’ economic forecasts, can sharpen forward guidance in a way that reduces policy uncertainty and enhances economic performance. Thus, well-designed communications are valuable, and behaving systematically 3 John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, North- Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 5 has the added advantage of making those communications easier for the public to understand. Increasing Transparency But what else should the central bank convey? For example, should it publish forecasts of variables in its policy reaction function and should these forecasts be based on the most likely path that the policy rate will follow or on some other assumption? While many central banks publish forecasts in detailed inflation or monetary policy reports, there is still debate about the nature of the forecasts and the assumptions that underlie them. For example, who owns the forecast? At some central banks, the forecast is that of the policy committee and thus represents a type of consensus forecast. In other cases, the forecast is that of the central bank staff. Individual policymakers who do not fully buy into the forecast are then free to express their own independent views about the outlook. A critical piece of a forecast emanating from the central bank is the nature of the future path of the policy rate. Should a central bank’s published forecast be based on its assessment of what the policy rate path is likely to be, perhaps based on its reaction function, a so-called unconditional forecast? Or should the forecast be based on an interest rate path that is more arbitrary, such as a constant interest rate path or one that is related to market expectations inferred from forward interest rates. Others question whether the central bank should reveal the forecast’s assumed interest rate path at all. Perhaps the greatest fear preventing most central banks from publishing the best assessment of its future interest rate path is that the public will assume the projections will be taken as a commitment to that path rather than a projection influenced by the evolution of the economy. In my view, such fears could be mitigated if policymakers would articulate the way they systematically expect to adjust policy in response to changes in economic conditions. While I have suggested potential problems if the central bank publishes its assessment of the 6 likely near-term path of policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, there is also a major benefit; namely, the added discipline that it places on the policy process itself. As I alluded to in my introduction, monetary policy does not just affect the economy through the current setting of the interest rate, but also through the expected path that the policy rate will take over time. Providing information about how that path is likely to evolve forces policymakers to think more deeply and systematically about policy. Communication about that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy. Again, my view is that policy transparency and forward guidance could be enhanced if the central bank was more explicit in articulating its systematic approach to policy. Conclusions and Going Forward I am fully aware that great care needs to be taken in providing more specific forms of forward guidance so that we avoid a false sense of certainty and a mistaken sense of commitment. Yet I believe systematic monetary policymaking can enhance economic performance, and therefore I favor clearer communication concerning the formulation of policy. In a stylized world, where there is a single monetary policymaker who has considerable confidence in a model of the economy, effective communication would include a forecast derived from this model. This forecast would incorporate a policy path that yields the best economic outcomes based on that single policymaker’s views. However, we don’t live in such a simple world. Monetary policymaking is often conducted by committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, such governance mechanisms have great strength in preventing institutions from lapsing into groupthink by ensuring that various views are heard in an environment that promotes better decisions and outcomes and helps to preserve central bank independence and accountability. Thus, it may be difficult for the FOMC to achieve a consensus forecast or policy path. One way 7 to enhance its communication would be to indicate the likely behavior of interest rates based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the conduct of monetary policy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to produce the resulting rule-based behavior. For the Fed, the Board staff’s economic model, called FRB/US, seems like a reasonable place to start. The FOMC could then articulate whether and why it anticipates policy to be somewhat more restrained or more accommodative relative to the projections given by the rules. A monetary policy report that might accompany such a forecast could include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. Performing this exercise would indicate the inherent uncertainty that policymakers face, yet it would also provide a better sense of the likely direction of policy and the variables most related systematically to that policy. Further, this type of communication would push the FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner, which I believe will lead to better economic outcomes over the longer run.

Reinventing Older Communities: Bridging Growth & Opportunities Philadelphia, PA May 12, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Welcoming Remarks Reinventing Older Communities: Bridging Growth & Opportunity Philadelphia, PA May 12, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser welcomes participants to the 2014 Reinventing Older Communities biennial conference. • President Plosser highlights emerging trends in the labor market, demographics, and educational system and discusses how understanding them can help prepare communities for growth and prosperity. • President Plosser says it is important to think about how we can continue to upgrade the skills and productivity of young people and the workforce more broadly to successfully reinvent our communities. Introduction It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Reinventing Older Communities conference. This is the sixth biennial conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. It has grown to become an important event for the Federal Reserve System as we bring together a rich and diverse mix of stakeholders who are interested in understanding the interaction between older industrial communities and the broader economy. The Federal Reserve System, which is marking its centennial year, is a decentralized central bank, with 12 individual Reserve Banks throughout the country that are overseen by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. As Theresa Singleton mentioned, we are delighted that seven of those Federal Reserve Banks are partnering with us to sponsor this year’s conference. I thank them and the other sponsors who have helped us create what promises to be an outstanding event. 2 I also want to thank you for taking the time to join us for this conference. Your participation here and your ongoing work in communities around the nation demonstrate your commitment to bridge growth and opportunity. In that way, we can reinvent our communities to ensure they are places where people can lead fulfilling and successful lives. But this work requires a creative forward-looking approach. Maybe it’s the fact that the Stanley Cup playoffs are still going on in mid-May, but I’m reminded that Wayne Gretzky was once asked about his success in hockey. The Great One responded by saying, “I skate to where the puck is going to be, not to where it has been.” He scored many goals with this strategy, and I believe his philosophy can be helpful in many disciplines. For example, I have talked about the need for monetary policy to be forward looking. But I believe this approach also applies to the revitalization of older communities. Now, I am by no means a community development expert or a hockey player. During my lifetime, I have lived in several older communities, including Rochester, NY, and Birmingham, AL, where I was born. I attended college in Nashville, TN, and graduate school in Chicago. I have lived and worked in New York City, as well as in and around Los Altos, CA, near the heart of Silicon Valley, and for almost eight years now, I have lived here in Philadelphia. It occurs to me that often older communities seek to turn back the clock to restore their past glories. A variation is to chase the puck. But in so doing, they find themselves perpetually in the past, never quite catching up and usually falling further behind. These are unlikely to be successful strategies. It is appropriate to learn from the past. But trying to restore the past is not a strategy for success. As most of you are aware, rebuilding and revitalizing our older cities is not about the past but our ability to seize the future. The Philadelphia of tomorrow will not the Philadelphia of the past, nor should it be. There are many opportunities for productive transitions and improvements. Indeed, we should seek to 3 exploit the latest innovations to make Philadelphia, like many of our postindustrial cities represented here today, wonderful places to live, work, and play. We have to acknowledge that our world has changed, and it continues to change at a very rapid pace. Embracing that change in order to reinvent the future of our cities is hard work, but it can pay off handsomely. The extent to which we are able to see where emerging trends are headed — where the puck will be, if you will — gives us the chance to take advantage of the opportunities they present. That will allow our communities to be more successful and more effective. I want to spend the remainder of my brief time discussing a few emerging issues for you to consider over the next few days, as you participate in the conference workshops and plenary sessions. Emerging Trends My comments will focus on the labor market and the importance it plays in shaping the future of our nation, but more relevant for this group, how it is shaping the future of our cities. The financial crisis and Great Recession led to severe dislocations in many sectors of our economy, including the housing sector, financial markets, and the labor market. Monetary and fiscal authorities responded in myriad ways to help the economy and our nation recover. But we should resist the temptation to implement programs with the goal of recreating the past. The unemployment rate has slowly recovered and is now 6.3 percent from its peak of 10 percent in October 2009. Some are skeptical, though, because the decline in the unemployment rate reflects not only increases in employment but declines in labor force participation. Many interpret such declines in the participation rate as representing discouraged workers who have stopped looking for work. Yet, labor force participation rates can also decline for demographic reasons. Indeed, we have seen steadily declining participation rates since 2000, and we can account for about three-quarters of this decline in participation 4 since the start of the recession in December 2007 because of increased retirements and movements into disability. Demographic trends, driven largely by an aging baby boomer generation, are altering the age distribution of our population. More specifically, we are getting older, and the size of the working age population is shrinking relative to those over 65. It is widely recognized that this fundamental shift will require major changes in the structure of Social Security and Medicare programs. Yet even as we solve such fiscal challenges associated with an aging population, we have to face up to the changing skills that employers are seeking. We are seeing a mismatch of skills in the workforce and the jobs that are being created. Many employers I have spoken to around the country talk about the fact that while they are hiring new workers, they are hiring a new type of worker: a worker who is more technologically sophisticated and productive. Going forward our educational system needs to be upgraded to prepare young people for this changing labor market. We are simply not keeping pace. More specifically, business leaders I have met talk repeatedly about having trouble finding qualified candidates in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and math, or so-called STEM jobs. As you know, the increasing needs for STEM-trained workers is one of the trends that will drive labor demand and productivity growth in our future. The Department of Commerce estimates that STEM employment grew at three times the rate of non-STEM employment in the previous decade and is projected to grow at twice the rate of non-STEM jobs through 2018. Sadly, we are not doing an adequate job of preparing our workforce for these jobs. Manufacturing is one sector in which firms have implemented new production technologies and are in need of STEM workers. The Philadelphia Fed’s April Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers included a special question about the factors influencing their decisions to 5 remain in the region. Respondents identified the availability of skilled labor as the most important factor. They also ranked the availability of skilled labor as becoming a more important factor in recent years. These concerns highlight the importance of our educational system in equipping our young people with the skills necessary to improve their own lives and improve the communities in which they live and work. Better wages accrue to a more productive employee. Firms will not locate in communities where they cannot find workers with the right skills and work ethic. For our older communities, successful revitalization will mean seeing to it that the workforce is up to the task. The standard of living in our nation as well as our communities is inextricably tied to the productivity of our workforce. As we look to the future, we have to think about how we can continue to upgrade the skills and productivity of young people and the workforce more broadly. If we are to successfully reinvent our communities, we must focus on preparing our workforce for the future. Conclusion Let me conclude by reminding you that the theme of this year’s conference is Bridging Growth and Opportunity. And I can think of no better bridge to opportunity than education. Education is a bridge for our young people and a bridge for our local economies. As someone who has spent over three decades in the teaching profession, I firmly believe that education is one of our most important investments. It is critical for the long-term health and prosperity of our nation. Education expands opportunity, leads to more innovation, and enhances productivity. In the end, this leads to better economic outcomes. I am excited that this year’s conference will highlight the critical role that education and workforce development play in reinventing older communities. We are honored to host a Sit Down with the Superintendents, a panel session that will give you an opportunity to engage in a 6 dialogue with school superintendents from several older industrial cities. This is your chance to discuss how community development and educational leaders can work together to connect people with the right skills to the jobs ahead. This is another example in which those of you who think about workforce development can get ahead of the puck. And score a goal for all older communities. The work that you do — building these bridges to opportunity — is about creating a better future for all of us who live in these special places. It will not be easy, and there is no quick fix, but it will be one of the most important things we can do. Thank you for participating in our program this year.

The Economic Outlook and Housing Women in Housing & Finance, Inc. Washington, D.C. May 20, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 The Economic Outlook and Housing Women in Housing & Finance, Inc. Washington, D.C. May 20, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the sustainable improvement in housing in the context of a broader economic recovery. He also discusses the Fed’s monetary policy issues, including forward guidance. • President Plosser is optimistic about the housing recovery. He believes that even though sales have leveled off recently, prices are still rising, and fundamentals remain sound, including stronger household formation, solid job growth, and consumers with stronger balance sheets. • He thinks that the U.S. economy is on firmer footing today than it has been in several years. He expects continued progress in 2014. He adds that one of the more encouraging signs for the economy comes from the labor market. • President Plosser believes reducing the pace of asset purchases in measured steps is moving in the right direction, but the time may come sooner than many expect when interest rates may have to rise if we are to avoid falling behind the curve. Introduction Thank you for inviting me here today. Women in Housing & Finance meetings have featured a number of Federal Reserve policymakers in recent years. A review of their speeches traces an arc through the turmoil in the U.S. housing market, which led to the worst financial crisis and economic downturn since World War II, the regulatory reform that followed, and the moderate but steady recovery over the past five years. In January 2008, then-Chairman Ben Bernanke addressed your group a month after the Great Recession began, following sharp and dramatic declines in the U.S. housing 2 market during 2007. Then, in June 2009, former Governor Elizabeth Duke described the actions that the Federal Reserve had taken to contain the financial crisis and promote economic recovery. In February 2011, former Kansas City Fed President Tom Hoenig asked whether the Dodd-Frank Act would actually improve the financial regulatory climate and solve the yet-unresolved issue of too-big-to-fail institutions. Today, I am delighted to join you at a time when, despite the effects of the severe winter weather, the economy is on the firmest footing it has been on since the recovery began. But this does not mean that we are likely to see, nor should we seek to see, a return to the unsustainable levels of residential real estate activity that preceded the financial crisis. That did not end well. Instead, the perspective I will offer today is one of sustainable improvement in housing in the context of a broader economic recovery. Then, I will close with some thoughts on monetary policy. Before I continue, though, I will note that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Economic Conditions So, let me begin with an overview of the U.S. economy. We are almost five years into a recovery that began in June 2009. Growth accelerated in the second half of 2013 but faced some stiff winter headwinds in the first quarter of this year. Yet, I think most of us now view this as a temporary weather-related slowdown and not a risk to the underlying recovery. Snowstorms and frigid temperatures affected every aspect of the economy, from sales and hours worked to logistics and supply chains during the first quarter of the year. You can’t sell a house if buyers can’t get in the front door. You can’t sell a car if it is buried in snow. And even if your factory is producing goods, you can’t deliver them to your customers as scheduled if trucks can’t navigate the highways or if trains have to slow 3 down to half their normal speed. My own view is that it will take another month or two before we can hope to see a somewhat clearer picture of the economy. The first estimate of GDP growth for the first quarter of 2014 showed that the overall economy was essentially flat, expanding at an annualized rate of just 0.1 percent. The underlying details are more encouraging. Consumer spending increased 3 percent, marking the 19th consecutive quarter of growth. This growth is supported by the fact that households have reduced their debt and strengthened their balance sheets over the past few years. And as the values of equities and real estate have risen, consumer savings rates have fallen and consumption spending has increased. The weakness in the overall GDP figure comes predominately from lackluster investment, both by businesses and homebuilders, as well as some pullback in exports and imports. Our business contacts as well as our surveys confirm that economic activity was greatly hampered by the winter weather in the Northeast and in other parts of the country. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers in our region has been a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. The survey results indicate that manufacturing activity has been expanding for 11 of the past 12 months. The only aberration was in February 2014, when respondents ascribed their declines to the severe weather. But the survey has since indicated positive growth in March, April, and May. The ISM manufacturing index, which measures nationwide activity, similarly dropped in the winter months and has since bounced back. Thus, I continue to believe that the U.S. economy is on a firmer footing today than it has been in several years. This is a cause for some optimism for continued progress in 2014. My forecast has been for growth of about 3 percent in 2014, and while the weather- related softness in the first quarter may temper this full-year outlook somewhat, it hasn’t led me to downgrade my outlook for the remainder of the year. 4 One of the most encouraging signs for the economy comes from the labor market, believe it or not. Employers added 288,000 jobs in April, the strongest gain since January 2012, and job growth in February and March were revised upward by a total of 36,000. The gains in April were broad-based across sectors, including 32,000 net new jobs in construction. Indeed, net job growth has exceeded 200,000 in five of the past seven months, with only the frozen months of December and January showing disappointing numbers. Even if we include those weak months, the economy has added more than 200,000 jobs per month on average over the past seven months. The unemployment rate dropped to 6.3 percent in April, down more than a full percentage point from a year ago and the lowest rate recorded in more than five years. This month’s decline was particularly sharp and was driven, in part, by a decline in labor force participation. I would note that the household survey, which gives us the unemployment rate, is more volatile than the establishment survey, which measures the number of new jobs added. I would not be surprised if the unemployment rate moved up a bit next month, but the downward trend continues, and we are making significant improvement. The number of those unemployed for more than 27 weeks dropped by 287,000 in April, and by 1.25 million since January 2013. While this is an improvement in labor markets, everyone will readily agree that the long-term unemployed remain a serious concern. I expect that the unemployment rate will fall below 6.2 by the end of 2014. If anything, this forecast may prove to be too pessimistic. Given the recent trends, an unemployment rate below 6 percent is certainly plausible. Inflation remains benign. It is running somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. That figure came in at 1.2 percent last year and is running at about the same pace over the first two months of this year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target both from below and above. Yet, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, 5 that inflation will move back toward our target over time. Indeed, we learned last week that the CPI moved up in April and is now running at 2 percent over the past year and at a 2.3 percent annual rate during the past three months. I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2 percent target. Given the large amount of monetary accommodation that we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. There are risks with respect to my growth forecast as well. While there continues to be some downside risk to growth, for the first time in years, I see the potential for more upside risk to the economic outlook. So as the economy gradually moves toward our 2 percent inflation target and the labor market continues to improve, we will need to calibrate monetary policy to reflect the improvements. Construction and Housing Markets Let me offer some further observations on the housing market. Residential real estate is a focus of many economists because it was ground zero for the financial crisis and the ensuing Great Recession. In the past, we tended to see housing lead the economy out of the recession, but for a number of reasons, that was not the case this time. As we know, sales of existing homes plummeted from unsustainable peaks during the housing boom. Sales bottomed out at an annual rate of 3.5 million houses in July 2010 and then climbed steadily for three years to 5.4 million in July 2013. That was about the same annual rate that we averaged in the years preceding the boom. Sales have fallen somewhat since mid-2013, due in part to rising mortgage rates, but those rates remain low by historical standards. The fundamentals of the housing market remain sound, including stronger household formation, solid job growth, and consumers with stronger balance sheets. 6 Home prices are well below their peaks, but they continue to improve as the market recovers. Two national measures were up recently: The S&P Case Shiller Home Price Index was up 12.8 percent year over year in its latest February number, and the CoreLogic National House Price Index was up 11.1 percent in March. Some have expressed concern over the housing recovery in recent months, but I am more optimistic. As I said, the fundamentals remain sound, and even though sales have leveled off recently, prices have continued to rise even over the past three months. That suggests that supply may be restricting sales more than weaker demand. But we will have to wait and see how the remainder of the spring and summer plays out. The structure of housing finance in our country remains a topic of intense discussion as it was before, during, and after the crisis. As I have argued in the past, the government- sponsored enterprises, or GSEs, were permitted to operate for private profit but with an implicit guarantee from the government, and so they were able to take extraordinary risk at the taxpayers’ expense. 1 This was a classic case of moral hazard, and it must not be repeated. There are many proposals for a new system of housing finance with varying levels of government support. There is no clear or easy answer to the degree of government involvement in the housing market; that is a decision we must make as a nation, carefully weighing the benefits of homeownership with the costs of the misallocation of scarce capital and the risks of unintended consequences. The U.S. subsidizes homeownership, more than any other developed country. We do so by providing an interest deduction for home mortgages and by underwriting housing debt through an explicit taxpayer support for the GSEs, which is reflected in mortgage rates. There are debates about the quantitative effects of these subsidies. But we should not be afraid to ask hard questions. Most financial advisors would tell you to 1 Charles I. Plosser, “Some Observations About Policy Lessons from the Crisis,” remarks at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, PA, December 4, 2009. 7 diversify your asset holdings, yet our housing policies incentivize families to do just the opposite: put your savings in your home. The policies encourage homeownership over other asset classes. The results for many families were devastating. The GSEs were at the center of the housing storm and we have to date not addressed the fundamental reforms required. However, if as a nation we choose to continue the subsidies to homeownership, the government involvement and subsidies must be explicit, transparent, and well understood. Burying those subsidies in complex financial arrangements or in new semigovernment enterprises will be counterproductive. Markets work best when the risks and rewards of decisions are clearly defined so that prices can accurately reflect each transaction and the appropriate risk monitoring takes place. Monetary Policy So let me turn to some issues for monetary policy. The Federal Reserve lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero more than five years ago. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases. We are now in our third round of this quantitative easing. Since September 2012, the FOMC has added about $1.4 trillion in long-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities to its balance sheet through this program, known as QE3. It is already twice the size of the last round of asset purchases, known as QE2. In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month. It announced another $10 billion reduction in January, March, and April and is now purchasing $45 billion a month. If the FOMC continues this path of measured reductions, the purchase program will end sometime this fall. If the economy continues to improve, though, we could find ourselves still trying to increase accommodation in an environment in which history suggests that policy should perhaps be moving in the opposite direction. 8 In addition to asset purchases, the Fed is using forward guidance to try and inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In the March and April statements, the FOMC reaffirmed its highly accommodative stance. The statement used qualitative language to describe the economic conditions that would lead to action. The Committee reported that it will look at a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments, to assess progress — both realized and expected — toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. The FOMC also noted, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to keep its target federal funds rate near zero for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the 2 percent goal and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. My own view is that, as we continue to move closer to our 2 percent inflation goal and the labor market improves, we must be prepared to adjust policy appropriately. That may well require us to begin raising interest rates sooner rather than later. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the U.S. economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth return to around 3 percent through the rest of 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue to decline, reaching 6.2 percent or lower by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. I expect the housing and construction sectors will continue to recover. But we should not seek to return to the heady days of last decade’s real estate boom. On monetary policy, reducing the pace of asset purchases in measured steps is moving in the right direction, but the pace may leave us behind the curve if the economy 9 continues to play out according to FOMC forecasts. Even after the asset purchase program has ended, monetary policy will still be highly accommodative. As the expansion gains traction, the challenge will be to reduce accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. Let me conclude with this thought. Over the past five years, the Fed and, dare I say, many other central banks have become much more interventionist. I do not think this is a particularly healthy state of affairs for central banks or our economies. The crisis in the U.S. has long passed. With a growing economy and the Fed’s long-term asset purchases coming to an end, now is the time to contemplate restoring some semblance of normalcy to monetary policy. In my view, the proper role for monetary policy is to work behind the scenes in limited and systematic ways to promote price stability and long-term growth. Since the onset of the financial crisis, central banks have become highly interventionist in their efforts to manipulate asset prices and financial markets in general as they attempt to fine-tune economic outcomes. This approach has continued well past the end of the financial crisis. While the motivations may be noble, we have created an environment in which “it is all about the Fed.” Market participants focus entirely too much on how the central bank may tweak its policy, and central bankers have become too sensitive and desirous of managing prices in the financial world. I do not see this as a healthy symbiotic relationship for the long term. If financial market participants believe that their success depends primarily on the next decisions of monetary policymakers rather than on economic fundamentals, our capital markets will not deliver the economic benefits they are capable of providing. And if central banks do not limit their interventionist strategies and focus on returning to more normal policymaking aimed at promoting price stability and long-term growth, then 10 they will simply encourage the financial markets to ignore fundamentals and to focus instead on the next actions of the central bank. I hope we can find a way to make monetary policy decision-making less interventionist, less discretionary, and more systematic. I believe our longer-term economic health will be the beneficiary.

Influencing Expectations in the Conduct of Monetary Policy 2014 Bank of Japan–Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies Conference: Monetary Policy in a Post-Financial Crisis Era Tokyo, Japan May 28, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Influencing Expectations in the Conduct of Monetary Policy 2014 Bank of Japan–Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies Conference: Monetary Policy in a Post-Financial Crisis Era Tokyo, Japan May 28, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser discusses his views on the role of forward guidance and transparency in influencing expectations. • President Plosser outlines his proposals to be more explicit about a reaction function. • President Plosser notes that one way to be more explicit would be to indicate the likely behavior of the policy rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with past conduct of monetary policy and are robust to our uncertainties regarding the true economic model. • President Plosser believes that the model created by the Federal Reserve Board staff, called FRB/US, seems to be a reasonable starting point for providing economic forecasts based on those rule-based policies; however, other models would be useful to consider. Introduction I would like to thank Governor Kuroda for inviting me to participate in this thought-provoking conference. I would also like to thank Professor Maury Obstfeld for suggesting a number of interesting topics for us to consider. He has highlighted some issues that I believe are intimately related to one another: namely, the central bank’s ability to influence expectations through forward guidance, the role of quantitative easing, and the process of exiting from that easing. Indeed, I think it is important that we think about monetary policy more holistically, if you will. How effective we are with forward guidance or quantitative easing can only be assessed in the broader context of a central bank’s overall approach to policy, including its 2 approach to communication and transparency. However, before I go any further, I should begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I want to focus my remarks today on communication and transparency in the conduct of monetary policy. One major reason for this emphasis is the recognition that the stance of monetary policy encompasses not just the current level of the short-term policy rate but its expected future path as well. Economists have come to understand that expectations about monetary policy can play an important role in determining economic outcomes, such as real economic growth and inflation. For example, today’s decision to save or to spend is influenced by the current interest rate as well as tomorrow’s expected future consumption. In turn, tomorrow’s expected future consumption is influenced by next period’s interest rate and next period’s expected future consumption. Therefore, the entire expected path of interest rates, not just the current interest rate, influences today’s consumption. This is not only true for personal consumption, but also business investment decisions, and the setting of prices and wages. An element of communication that has received a good deal of attention is forward guidance. Forward guidance relates to the communication about the future course of monetary policy, both the likely path of the short-term policy rate as well as path of balance sheet actions associated with quantitative easing. Of course, one reason for this increased focus on future policy actions is that the current short- term policy rate conveys little information, as it has been constrained by the zero lower bound. Thus, forward guidance in the U.S. has evolved to include information about the future pace and duration of asset purchases, as well as under what conditions, and how quickly, the policy rate might eventually lift off from the zero lower bound. 3 However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent tool of policy. Its effectiveness is intimately related to other features of monetary policy. For example, a credible, systematic approach to policy and the general openness and transparency of the policy process are essential elements in shaping expectations and thus must be considered when formulating forward guidance. For forward guidance to be successful, it must be credible. And it is difficult to make it credible if it is inconsistent with other features of the policy framework. One of the most important ways to support credibility and thus the effectiveness of forward guidance is to practice it as part of a systematic policy framework. I believe that indicating how the evolution of key economic variables systematically shapes current and future policy decisions is critical to such a policy framework. Indeed, a commitment to a policy framework that is systematic and rule-like provides the foundation for establishing expectations for the future path of policy and thus forward guidance. If We Only Had a Reaction Function The appropriate way to make policy systematic and rule-like is to make policy history dependent and base policy decisions on the state of the economy. Doing so does not commit the policymakers to particular future values of the policy rate, but describing a reaction function explains how the policy rate will be determined by economic conditions. Unfortunately, the science of monetary policy has not reached the point where we can specify a precise or optimal rule for setting policy. That would require an agreed-upon model of the economy — something we don’t have yet. Nevertheless, I believe systematic policy can be guided by various forms of robust rules, such as the one proposed by John Taylor — with which we are all familiar. The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. The 4 reality is that Taylor-like rules yield very good results in a variety of theoretical settings. This feature of the rules is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule delivers good outcomes in a variety of models means that these simple rules can provide useful guidance for policy. Systematic policies that provide important information about the policymakers’ reaction function combined with other information, such as the policymakers’ economic forecasts, can sharpen forward guidance in ways that reduce policy uncertainty and enhance economic performance. Thus, well-designed communications are valuable, and behaving systematically has the added advantage of making those communications easier for the public to understand. Balance Sheet Policies I have focused my discussion on forward guidance with respect to the setting of the policy rate, but these principles apply equally to balance sheet policies. There is room to debate how effective balance sheet policies, such as quantitative easing, have been, and indeed, just how they affect interest rates and economic activity. Some think balance sheet policies work through portfolio balance effects that alter risk premia. The quantitative effects on macroeconomic outcomes, however, are unclear. And the theoretical underpinnings for this channel depend on the model and the assumptions made regarding the extent of financial market frictions and the degree and form of market segmentation. Others believe that quantitative easing acts through the potential signaling effects associated with large changes in the balance sheet. Namely, adding to the balance sheet could signal a more accommodative future policy, which lowers longer-term nominal and real interest rates, and thereby spurs current economic activity, including expected inflation. Of course, if the policies and communications regarding the future path of the policy rate were transparent and fully credible, such signaling would not be necessary. Moreover, if signaling is the primary channel through which large-scale asset purchases act, there remains much that we don’t 5 understand about how to calibrate such operations. In any event, it will be important that the signals conveyed by balance sheet policies are consistent with the forward guidance about future interest rate policies. This has been a difficult communications challenge at times for the FOMC. And it will likely remain a communications challenge as the Committee coordinates the unwinding of the Fed’s balance sheet with the gradual increase in the policy rate. Implementing Forward Guidance I have indicated conceptually why a systematic approach to communications is important but have yet to discuss how a central bank might implement such an approach. This issue has received increased attention in recent years, with various central banks adopting different strategies. The differences are based on alternative economic viewpoints as well as on varying institutional structures. I think the Fed can learn a great deal from the various approaches. Many of you in this room are very knowledgeable, and have thought deeply about the costs and benefits of the various approaches. A forecast is, of course, a critical piece of information emanating from the central bank, and the nature of the policy rate’s future path is an important element of that forecast. These forecasts are often presented and discussed by central banks in the form of published inflation or monetary policy reports. Such reports can and should be an important element of a central bank’s communication and transparency about the policy process. But a number of interesting questions arise. Should a central bank’s published forecast be based on its assessment of what the policy rate path is likely to be, or should the forecast be based on an interest rate path that is more arbitrary, such as a constant interest rate path or one that is related to market expectations? I am fully aware that great care needs to be taken in providing more specific forms of forward guidance. We must avoid a false sense of certainty regarding future policy or a mistaken sense of commitment to a specific path of policy rates. Yet, I believe there are approaches, like the one I am about to suggest, that can avoid or mitigate these pitfalls. Because I believe 6 systematic monetary policymaking can enhance economic performance, I am in favor of clearer communication concerning the formulation of policy. Now, in our stylized models, there tends to be a single monetary policymaker who knows the structure of the economy. Therefore, the approach for communication would be a forecast derived from the policymaker’s model as well as a policy path that yields the best economic outcomes based on that model of the economy. Unfortunately, we don’t live in such a world. Monetary policymaking is often conducted by committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, such governance mechanisms ensure that various views are heard. This promotes better decisions and outcomes and helps preserve central bank independence and accountability. Thus, it may be difficult for a large committee like the FOMC to achieve a consensus forecast or policy path. Yet, we can enhance our communication by indicating the likely behavior of interest rates based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the conduct of monetary policy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to produce the resulting rule-based behavior. For the Fed, the economic model called FRB/US, which was developed by the Board’s staff, seems like a reasonable place to start. Such an exercise could also be enhanced, I believe, by using some of the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models that have been developed within the Federal Reserve System. The FOMC could then articulate whether and why it anticipates policy to be somewhat more restrained or more accommodative, relative to the projections given by the rules. The current monetary policy report that the Fed delivers each February and July could be adapted to include those exercises as well as a discussion of the opinions of Committee members regarding the results. It is important that in performing this exercise we illustrate the various dimensions of 7 uncertainty that policymakers face. For example, there is model uncertainty, forecast uncertainty, and the variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts and other devices to highlight such uncertainty, and we, the Fed, would be wise to do the same. Even acknowledging the uncertainty, the exercise will provide a better sense of the likely direction of policy and the variables most related systematically to that policy. I believe these steps toward greater transparency and communication would be significant progress, and would encourage the FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner. I believe this would lead to better economic outcomes over the longer run.

Monetary Rules: Theory and Practice Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century Policy Conference Hoover Institution Stanford, CA May 30, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Monetary Rules: Theory and Practice Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century Policy Conference Hoover Institution Stanford, CA May 30, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser discusses his views on the benefits of a systematic and rule-like approach to monetary policy. • President Plosser outlines his proposals to indicate the likely behavior of the policy rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with past conduct of monetary policy and are robust to our uncertainties regarding the true economic model. • President Plosser believes that the model created by the Federal Reserve Board staff, called FRB/US, seems to be a reasonable starting point for providing economic forecasts based on those rule-based policies; however, other models would be useful to consider. Note: President Plosser presented related remarks on May 28, 2014, at the 2014 Bank of Japan– Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies Conference. Introduction I would like to thank John Taylor for inviting me to participate in this panel discussion about a subject that I feel is very important. Rules-based policy is a topic that I have discussed numerous times in the past few years, urging policymakers to seek a more systematic approach to policymaking. I am particularly honored to be on a panel with my colleague John Williams, whose research in this area has been an important influence on my views, as well as Tom Sargent. In Tom’s case, there probably isn’t an economist in this room who hasn’t been 2 influenced by his work and his contributions to economics. But before I go any further, I should begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Theoretical Justification for Rules The theory part of this session’s title is well established. In their Nobel Prize-winning work, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott demonstrated that a credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic, rule-like manner over time leads to better outcomes than discretion.1 Since then, numerous papers using a variety of models have investigated the benefits of rule-like behavior in monetary policy and found that there are indeed significant benefits.2 Policies characterized by commitment have been shown to lead to more economic stability — lower and less volatile inflation and less volatile output. In fact, the mainstream theoretical models that we use for monetary and macroeconomic analysis are built on the notion that monetary policy is conducted in a rule-like manner. The Practice The practice part of the session title has proven to be a bit more elusive. The science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the optimal rule for setting monetary policy. The reason is that optimal rules, that is, those that maximize economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they are derived, and there is no broad-based consensus for the right model. More relevant is the finding that the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. In addition, optimal rules can often be quite complex, thus making them difficult to implement and to communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. 1 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91. 2 For an excellent overview, see Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature (December 1999), pp. 1661–1707. 3 However, these limitations to implementing optimal policy rules should not deter us from efforts to adopt a more systematic rule-like approach to the conduct of policy. There has been a great deal of progress made in identifying simple rules that appear to perform well in a variety of models and environments. Such robust rules can form a basis for developing more systematic, rule-like policymaking. One important and desirable characteristic of a systematic and rule-like approach to policy relates to communication. In particular, it is an approach that is easily communicated to the public and thus greatly improves the transparency and predictability of monetary policy, which reduces surprises. The public and markets are more informed about the course of monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances. Equally important in my view is that greater clarity about the policymakers’ reaction function strengthens accountability and thus can serve to preserve the central bank’s independence. The most well-known simple rule, of course, is the one proposed by John Taylor in 1993. 3 The Taylor rule and the family of rules it has inspired call for setting the nominal fed funds rate based on three factors: the economy’s long-run real interest rate plus the Fed’s target rate of inflation, the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target, and the departure of real GDP from some measure of “potential” GDP. The rule implies, for example, that when inflation is above target, the funds rate should increase by more than one-for-one with the deviation, and when GDP is below “potential,” the funds rate should be reduced. The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. Taylor-like rules tend to fall in the class of those rules that are robust. That is, they yield good 3 John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, North- Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 4 results in a variety of theoretical settings. This feature is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule delivers good outcomes in a variety of models means that simple, robust rules can provide useful guidance for policy. Given model uncertainty and data measurement problems, there are, of course, limitations to the use of a simple rule. The rule is basically intended to work well on average, but central banks look at many variables in determining policy. There inevitably will be times when economic developments fall outside the scope of our models and warrant unusual monetary policy action. Events such as 9/11, the Asian financial crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from a simple rule. Having articulated a rule guiding policymaking in normal times, however, policymakers will be expected to explain the departures from the rule in these unusual circumstances. With a rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform us how excessively tight or easy policy might be relative to normal. If the events are temporary, policymakers will have to explain how and when policy is likely to return to normal. Thus, a simple rule provides a valuable benchmark for assessing the appropriate stance of policy. That makes it a useful tool to enhance effective communication and transparency. Rules and Forward Guidance In addition to providing important guidance for current policy decisions, Taylor-like rules can also be extremely useful in providing guidance for the expected future path of policy. Such forward guidance has received a good deal of attention recently. One reason for this increased attention is that short-term rates have been constrained by the zero lower bound. Thus, forward guidance and communication regarding future policy decisions take on greater significance. However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent policy tool. Its effectiveness is intimately related to other features of monetary policy. Monetary policy should be thought of 5 more holistically, if you will. How effective we are with forward guidance, for example, can only be assessed or thought of in the context of a central bank’s overall approach to policy, including its approach to communication and transparency. In particular, I see a credible, rule-like approach to policy and the general openness and transparency of the policy process as essential elements in shaping expectations. Indeed, a commitment to a policy framework that is systematic and rule-like provides the foundation for establishing expectations concerning the future path of policy and thus forward guidance. Rules as Benchmarks: A Step Forward So from my perspective, using Taylor-like rules to shape current and expected future policy is an important and useful part of any monetary policy framework. The operational question is how might one go about such an effort? This is not a trivial assignment. As I mentioned at the outset, it has proved to be quite elusive. In a stylized world, where there is a single monetary policymaker who has considerable confidence in a model of the economy, communication would include a forecast derived from this model. This forecast would incorporate a policy path that yields the best economic outcomes based on that single policymaker’s views. Unfortunately, we don’t live in such a world. Monetary policymaking is often conducted by committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, such governance mechanisms ensure that various views are heard in an environment that promotes better decisions and better outcomes. Nevertheless, I believe that given the nature of U.S. institutional arrangements, Taylor-like rules can serve a very useful purpose. Specifically, they could underpin the construction of a periodic detailed monetary policy report, a feature of communication that has been adopted by many 6 central banks around the world. However, while these reports have many similarities, there are some key differences. Many central banks include detailed forecasts in their published reports and highlight risks along with the outlook. This communication about the evolution of key economic variables that shape policy is important, but there is still debate about the nature of the forecasts and the assumptions that underlie them. A critical piece of a forecast emanating from the central bank is the nature of the future path of the policy rate. Should a central bank’s published forecast be based on its assessment of what the policy rate path is likely to be, perhaps based on its reaction function, or should the forecast be based on an interest rate path that is more arbitrary, such as a constant interest rate path or one that is related to market expectations? An alternative approach that could easily be adopted would be to indicate the likely behavior of interest rates based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the conduct of monetary policy in the past or ones that are considered robust across various models of the economy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to produce the resulting rule-based behavior. For the Fed, the economic model developed by the Board’s staff, called FRB/US, seems like a reasonable place to start. Such an exercise could also be enhanced, I believe, by using some of the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models that have been developed within the Federal Reserve System. The FOMC could then use its biannual monetary policy reports to communicate the results and whether and why it anticipates policy to be somewhat more restrained or more accommodative relative to the projections given by the various rules. The monetary policy report could also include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. Policy statements between reports can refer back to the reports to provide consistency in the Committee’s communications with the public. 7 Performing this exercise would illustrate the various dimensions of uncertainty that policymakers face. For example, there is model uncertainty, forecast uncertainty, and the variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts and other devices to highlight such bands of uncertainty about the forecast, and the Fed should do the same. It would provide a better sense of the likely direction of policy and the variables most related systematically to that policy. Further, this type of communication would push the FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner, which I believe will lead to better economic outcomes over the longer run. Conclusions I am fully aware that we need to take great care in providing more specific forms of forward guidance so that we avoid a false sense of certainty and a mistaken sense of commitment. Yet, I believe systematic rule-like monetary policymaking can enhance economic performance, and therefore, I favor clearer communication concerning the formulation of policy. Providing information about how the policy path is likely to evolve forces policymakers to think more deeply and more systematically about policy. Communication about that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy.
