The Outlook for Growth Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Maryland Bankers Association “First Friday” Economic Outlook Forum Baltimore, Maryland January 4, 2019 Thank you for inviting me to join you today. I was sorry to miss you last year, but hope you will forgive me as I’d been on the job in Richmond for all of five days. Now that I’ve got a year under my belt, I hope I’ve learned enough to have something interesting to share. But you’ll be the judge of that! Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 With apologies to the familiar faces in the room (including many members of our Baltimore Board of Directors), I’d like to start by telling you a little bit about myself and what we’re hoping to accomplish at the Richmond Fed. I’ll then turn to our country’s prospects for sustained economic growth, particularly several critical levers. And then I’m looking forward to taking your questions. “On the Ground” in the Fifth District I came to Richmond after a 30-year career at McKinsey in Atlanta, where in addition to consulting I had many line roles, including CFO. While there, I had the opportunity to serve on the Atlanta Fed’s Board of Directors, and I was inspired by the role the Bank played during the financial crisis and by its broader role in the community. When I got the phone call about the job -2- in Richmond, I was nearing retirement. I thought it would be a wonderful chance to keep giving back and (more selfishly) to keep learning and growing. So what am I hoping to accomplish? First, I hope to bring a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues are quite talented economists, regulators and bankers. But I hope I bring a unique perspective as a businessperson on topics such as pricing, the impact of tariffs or tax cuts and the real drivers of wages, to name a few. To make that effective, I want to be “on the ground” throughout our District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas. During the past year, I’ve done just that—traveling pretty much nonstop (although still less than I traveled as a consultant). I am trying to be in Maryland every month. As I’ve traveled, I’ve seen areas of our District that are thriving and areas that are struggling. I think the Richmond Fed has a real opportunity— and responsibility—to improve our understanding of the challenges people face and to search for opportunities to make a difference. For example, there are large disparities in employment, education and earnings between urban and rural areas, and also within urban areas. Here in Baltimore, at the same time new shops and restaurants are being built on Pratt Street and apartment towers are rising on Light Street, there are parts of the city where people can’t find jobs and rowhouses sit vacant. We can bring our research to bear to help change things. -3- Economic Growth Let’s turn to the national economy. I don’t need to tell this group that it looked very strong in 2018. GDP growth averaged 3.3 percent through the third quarter; consumer spending has been strong; there are more job openings than people looking for jobs, as unemployment reached a nearly 50-year low of 3.7 percent; and inflation is roughly at target. In that context, the Fed has been returning rates toward normal levels, most recently in December. I forecast growth to continue this year, though at a somewhat slower pace. But as we enter 2019, I hear a lot of concern. Some is environmental, driven by trade or politics. Some is market driven, as volatility has increased and the yield curve has narrowed. Some is margin pressure. But overall, the question I hear most is, “How long can this growth continue?” That’s the question we’re here today to discuss, but I’m actually not going to focus too closely on 2019. Instead, I’d like to focus on the longer term; it’s often easier to look out at the horizon than down at your feet. For example, even for 2020, you’ll see a pretty wide range of opinions. The Office of Management and Budget forecasts 2020 GDP growth of 3 percent, while the Congressional Budget Office and the Fed’s most recent Summary of Economic Projections put growth closer to 2 percent. With appropriate humility about all of our forecasting records, I thought I might lay out what needs to happen to sustain growth at the high end of the forecast range and where some of the critical levers lie. -4- Before I do, let me emphasize why high-end growth matters. Stronger growth is the sign of a healthy economy. Stronger growth creates revenues to reduce the federal budget deficit at a time when it seems unlikely to be addressed otherwise. Stronger growth improves everyone’s living standards. Let me also emphasize that the levers for growth range far from monetary policy, and are well beyond the Fed’s powers and its dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. But here we go. Population and Labor Force Growth At one level, the math of economic growth is pretty simple. More people need to work, and/or they need to be more productive. With respect to the workforce, the native-born population is growing slowly, and the Census Bureau projects it will slow even more in the future. (It’s not just the United States; fertility rates have fallen in nearly every developed country.) Since the 1990s, immigration has driven about half of the growth in the labor force, but that trend is under threat, as there are proposals to reduce even legal immigration. At the same time population growth is slowing, a smaller share of the population is working. Since the early 2000s, labor force participation has declined around 4 percentage points. A large part of this is demographics, as my generation retires and more young people attend college. That means to grow the economy, people need to come off the sidelines. Which segments offer the greatest potential? -5- Our country’s largest metro areas are thriving, while many smaller cities and rural areas are struggling. In our District, the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers in rural areas is almost 6 points lower than it is in urban areas. If the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers across the country as a whole were equal to the ratio for counties in the largest metro areas, an additional 3.5 million people would be working. More than 840,000 of these workers would be in the Fifth District alone. People with less education face challenges in the labor market. The employment-to-population ratio for people with only a high school degree is less than 56 percent, while for those with at least a bachelor’s degree it’s around 72 percent. Closing this gap would put more than 10 million additional people to work. Women’s labor force participation, after rising steadily for four decades, leveled off and then began to decline around 2000. This is a divergence from other developed countries. In the late 1990s, the participation rate for prime-age women in Canada was the same as in the United States. Now it is 8 points higher. If the United States had the same participation rate as Canada, an additional 5.2 million women would join the labor force. Another challenge we’re all too familiar with in the Fifth District is the opioid epidemic. Maryland, D.C. and especially West Virginia are among the top seven states for overdose death rates. With respect to the labor market, it’s hard to tease out cause and effect—do people abuse opioids while they’re out of work, or are they unable to work because they have a drug abuse problem? But some research does suggest that the epidemic has had a direct effect on labor force -6- participation, lowering it by as much as 4.6 percentage points for prime-age men in counties with higher rates of opioid prescriptions.2 The net is a challenge for growing our economy. Unless immigration increases or people come off the sidelines, the Bureau of Labor Statistics projects the labor force will grow just 0.6 percent annually over the next decade. Productivity Growth The second half of the growth equation is productivity. Between 1985 and 2005, the United States had a productivity boom, with average annual growth of 2.3 percent. I see a number of drivers, including an increased emphasis on shareholder value in the corporate sector, deregulation that increased competition and reduced global trade barriers. Productivity also increased due to new technologies that enabled efficiency, such as automation, internet distribution, global sourcing and outsourcing, and lean management. At the same time, these technologies spread through enhanced diffusion via the business press, greater talent mobility and, if I may say so, growth in consulting. Over the past decade or so, however, productivity growth has slowed—just 1.3 percent average annual growth between 2006 and the present. I find this very surprising from my perspective as a businessperson, as I didn’t observe any particular cliff around 2005. In fact, I saw management equally motivated to drive a focus on the bottom line. I saw clients continuing to invest, to automate and to drive operating performance. And I saw new, powerful practices being -7- implemented, such as artificial intelligence, offshoring overhead, voice recognition and digitization. In short, I saw my individual clients get more productive. I’ve been on a journey to understand what’s going on, recognizing that every sector has its own story. One possibility is that the mix of businesses has shifted, for example because of the growth in services or offshoring productive sectors. But the slowdown is widespread. Nearly every sector has experienced some decline in productivity growth since the mid-2000s (although the extent varies across sectors).3 Another possibility is mismeasurement. Some surely exists; for example, the leisure value of free apps on a smartphone isn’t measured, while toys are. But again, the widespread nature of the decline makes mismeasurement unlikely as an across-the-board explanation. Maybe this is just the pause before an acceleration due to AI and digitization. That would be great! But I never saw the pause in practice, and I worry about hope as a strategy. Finally, for this audience, I’ve thought about regulatory burdens and the cost of cybersecurity. Clearly costs have been created that don’t create revenues. But these costs can’t explain all the slowdown in this sector or across sectors. So what do I think I know? I believe the productivity slowdown is real, and part of the explanation is nearly two decades of business underinvestment. Since 2000, investment has been low relative to measures of corporate profitability, driven by industry leaders not investing in -8- growth the way they once did.4 Airlines have moderated capacity growth, banks aren’t adding branches and even successful retailers aren’t adding stores. And in my view, it’s easy to draw a line from lower investment to lower productivity growth. That leads me to the question, why has investment been low? My sense is that short-termism is increasing as CEO tenure decreases and corporate activism escalates. In addition, share repurchases have become a compelling alternate use of capital. And finally, some companies are still feeling hungover from the Great Recession. For example, I’ve spoken with business leaders who, even if they see opportunities for investment, are reluctant to take them. They continually see the next recession as “just around the corner.” As I said earlier, that’s a real issue today, as the economy’s numbers look strong but business sentiment has weakened considerably. Another factor in slowing productivity growth is declining start-up rates. Successful entrants drive innovation, which drives productivity. But the data show a massive reduction in entry rates, in all states and all sectors. Start-ups accounted for 12 percent of all firms in the late 1980s. That fell to 10.6 percent in the mid-2000s, and to 8 percent after 2008.5 I certainly see this in the banking sector, with only 13 de novo banks since 2010, compared to hundreds each year before the financial crisis (not that hundreds is necessarily the target). As with investment, some of this decline might be lingering risk aversion after the Great Recession. Some might be the impact of regulation. Research also points to the slow growth of the working age population as an explanation.6 In addition, I hear that there are tangible impediments—such as acquiring the necessary technology and talent—to building the scale and sophistication entrants require to be successful. -9- What To Do? If the workforce grows just 0.6 percent per year, and productivity growth continues at about 1.3 percent annually, “trend” core growth is only in the 1.9 percent range— far slower than today. That’s the driver of the lower estimates you see. So what can be done to change that trend? The first step is to look at policies that could help draw more people back to the labor force, such as policies to support women’s participation in the workforce. One of the biggest differences between the United States and other developed countries is the availability of paid leave and subsidized child care, both of which have been shown to increase women’s labor force participation.7 As I noted a few minutes ago, people with less education are less likely to be working. So another critical area is workforce development initiatives to help people improve their skills. This is particularly important in rural and inner-city communities. It starts with programs to help adult workers acquire in-demand skills. But workforce development needs to start much earlier, at the K-12 level or even in early childhood.8 In this way, students who want to attend college can receive the preparation they need to graduate, because far too many students do not. Roughly 40 percent of students who enroll in a four-year college don’t graduate within six years, and many of those who leave without a degree are still left with significant debt. The workforce can grow if students who enter college can graduate, and young people have, and know about, viable alternatives to four-year colleges. -10- In addition, legal immigration is a huge opportunity to grow our workforce and increase our country’s human capital and entrepreneurial energy. I empathize with concerns that immigration could be detrimental to the employment and wages of Americans. But the economic research shows that immigration boosts productivity and start-up rates.9 Our country’s competitive advantage is that the most talented people in the world want to live here. That’s why so many of our grandparents came and started businesses (in my family’s case, a shoe store and doughnut shop). Our country should embrace this advantage. Speaking of productivity, the United States needs to promote a healthy environment for business investment. Business investment has grown significantly in five of the last six quarters. But, as I said, uncertainty is currently a real issue for the businesspeople I’ve spoken with throughout our District. This is particularly true when it comes to trade, but it’s also an issue in sectors such as health care, where the regulatory environment is unclear. American businesses are practical and innovative. If the rules are clear and the political environment is stable, they will find a way to grow. Conclusion In sum, the United States faces a slow growth trend that isn’t in any of our interests. Changing the slope is doable via initiatives to expand the workforce and boost productivity growth. It’s an opportunity this country can’t afford to pass up. Thank you, and I welcome your reactions and questions. -11- 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Dionissi Aliprantis and Mark E. Schweitzer, “Opioids and the Labor Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper no. 18-07, May 2018. 3 Martin Baily and Nicholas Montalbano, “Why is U.S. Productivity Growth So Slow?” Brookings Institution Hutchins Center Working Paper no. 22, September 2016. 4 German Gutierrez and Thomas Philipon, “Investmentless Growth: An Empirical Investigation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017. 5 Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “ The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 3–24. 6 Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,” Manuscript, May 2018. 7 Janet Yellen, “So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy ,” Speech at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5, 2017. 8 For example, see Kartik B. Athreya, Urvi Neelakantan, and Jessie Romero, “ Expanding the Scope of Workforce Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 14-05, May 2014. 9 For example, see Giovanni Peri, “Immigration, Productivity, and Labor Markets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2016, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 3-30; and Kauffman Foundation, “Research on Immigration and Entrepreneurship,” October 2016.

Ensuring Longer-Term Growth Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Greater Raleigh Chamber of Commerce 2019 Economic Forecast Raleigh, North Carolina January 10, 2019 Thank you for inviting me to join you this morning. I’d like to start by telling you a little bit about myself and what we’re hoping to accomplish at the Richmond Fed. I’ll then turn to our country’s prospects for sustained economic growth, particularly several critical levers. And then I’m looking forward to taking your questions. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 “On the Ground” in the Fifth District I came to Richmond a year ago after a 30-year career at McKinsey in Atlanta, where in addition to consulting I had many line roles, including CFO. While there, I had the opportunity to serve on the Atlanta Fed’s Board of Directors, and I was inspired by the role the Bank played during the financial crisis and by its broader role in the community. When I got the phone call about the job in Richmond, I was nearing retirement. I thought it would be a wonderful chance to keep giving back and (more selfishly) to keep learning and growing. So what am I hoping to accomplish? First, I hope to bring a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues are quite talented economists, regulators and bankers. But I hope I bring a unique -2- perspective as a businessperson on topics such as pricing, the impact of tariffs or tax cuts and the real drivers of wages, to name a few. To make that effective, I want to be “on the ground” throughout our District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas. During the past year, I’ve done just that—traveling pretty much nonstop (although still less than I traveled as a consultant). I am in North Carolina every month. As I’ve traveled, I’ve seen areas of our District that are thriving and areas that are struggling. I think the Richmond Fed has a real opportunity— and responsibility—to improve our understanding of the challenges people face and to search for opportunities to make a difference. For example, there are large disparities in employment, education and earnings between urban and rural areas, and also within urban areas. In North Carolina, about 36 percent of adults in urban areas have at least a bachelor’s degree, compared to just 20 percent in rural areas, and the labor force participation rate for working-age adults is nearly four percentage points higher in urban areas. And even here in Raleigh, which is one of the most vibrant cities in our District, 15 percent of families with children younger than 18 live below the federal poverty level. Economic Growth Let’s turn to the national economy. GDP growth averaged 3.3 percent through the third quarter of 2018; consumer spending has been robust; inflation is roughly at target; and the unemployment rate remains near a 50-year low at 3.9 percent, with more job openings than people looking for work. In fact, we saw in the December employment report that the economy added more than 312,000 jobs in the last month of the year— a very strong finish. In that context, -3- the Fed has been returning rates toward normal levels, most recently in December. I forecast growth to continue this year, though at a somewhat slower pace. But as we enter 2019, I hear a lot of concern. Some is environmental, driven by trade, international economies or politics. Some is market driven, as volatility has increased and the yield curve has narrowed. Some is margin pressure. But overall, the question I hear most is, “How long can this growth continue?” After a nine-year expansion—one of the longest on record —it’s a fair question to ask. I’m actually not going to focus too closely on 2019. Instead, I’d like to focus on the longer term; it’s often easier to look out at the horizon than down at your feet. For example, even for 2020, you’ll see a pretty wide range of opinions. The Office of Management and Budget forecasts 2020 GDP growth of 3 percent, while the Congressional Budget Office and the Fed’s most recent Summary of Economic Projections put growth closer to 2 percent. With appropriate humility about all of our forecasting records, I thought I might lay out what needs to happen to sustain growth at the high end of the forecast range and where some of the critical levers lie. Before I do, let me emphasize why high-end growth matters. Stronger growth is the sign of a healthy economy. Stronger growth creates revenues to reduce the federal budget deficit at a time when it seems unlikely to be addressed otherwise. Stronger growth improves everyone’s living standards. -4- Let me also emphasize that the levers for growth range far from monetary policy, and are well beyond the Fed’s powers and its dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. But here we go. Population and Labor Force Growth At one level, the math of economic growth is pretty simple. More people need to work, and/or they need to be more productive. With respect to the workforce, the native-born population is growing slowly, and the Census Bureau projects it will slow even more in the future. (It’s not just the United States; fertility rates have fallen in nearly every developed country.) Since the 1990s, immigration has driven about half of the growth in the labor force, but that trend is under threat, as there are proposals to reduce even legal immigration. At the same time population growth is slowing, a smaller share of the population is working. Since the early 2000s, labor force participation has declined around 4 percentage points. A large part of this is demographics, as my generation retires and more young people attend college. That means to grow the economy, people need to come off the sidelines. Which segments offer the greatest potential? Our country’s largest metro areas are thriving, while many smaller cities and rural areas are struggling. In our District, the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers in rural areas is almost 6 points lower than it is in urban areas. If the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers across the country as a whole were equal to the ratio for counties in the -5- largest metro areas, an additional 3.5 million people would be working. More than 840,000 of these workers would be in our District alone. People with less education face challenges in the labor market. The employment-to-population ratio for people with only a high school degree is less than 56 percent, while for those with at least a bachelor’s degree it’s around 72 percent. Closing this gap would put more than 10 million additional people to work. Women’s labor force participation, after rising steadily for four decades, leveled off and then began to decline around 2000. This is a divergence from other developed countries. In the late 1990s, the participation rate for prime-age women in Canada was the same as in the United States. Now it is 8 points higher. If the United States had the same participation rate as Canada, an additional 5.2 million women would join the labor force. The net is a challenge for growing our economy. Unless immigration increases or people come off the sidelines, the Bureau of Labor Statistics projects the labor force will grow just 0.6 percent annually over the next decade. Productivity Growth The second half of the growth equation is productivity. Between 1985 and 2005, the United States had a productivity boom, with average annual growth of 2.3 percent. I saw a number of drivers, including an increased emphasis on shareholder value in the corporate sector, deregulation that increased competition and reduced global trade barriers. Productivity also -6- increased due to new technologies that enabled efficiency, such as automation, internet distribution, global sourcing and outsourcing, and lean management. At the same time, these technologies spread through enhanced diffusion via the business press, greater talent mobility and, if I may say so, growth in consulting. Over the past decade or so, however, productivity growth has slowed—just 1.3 percent average annual growth between 2006 and the present. I find this very surprising from my perspective as a businessperson, as I didn’t observe any particular cliff around 2005. In fact, I saw management equally motivated to drive a focus on the bottom line. I saw clients continuing to invest, to automate and to drive operating performance. And I saw new, powerful practices being implemented, such as artificial intelligence, offshoring overhead, voice recognition and digitization. In short, I saw my individual clients get more productive. I’ve been on a journey to understand what’s going on, recognizing that every sector has its own story. One possibility is that the mix of businesses has shifted, for example because of the growth in services or offshoring productive sectors. But the slowdown is widespread. Nearly every sector has experienced some decline in productivity growth since the mid-2000s (although the extent varies across sectors).2 Another possibility is mismeasurement. Some surely exists; for example, the leisure value of free apps on a smartphone isn’t measured, while toys are. But again, the widespread nature of the decline makes mismeasurement unlikely as an across-the-board explanation. -7- Maybe this is just the pause before an acceleration due to AI and digitization. That would be great! But I never saw the pause in practice, and I worry about hope as a strategy. So what do I think I know? I believe the productivity slowdown is real, and part of the explanation is nearly two decades of business underinvestment. Since 2000, investment has been low relative to measures of corporate profitability, driven by industry leaders not investing in growth the way they once did.3 Airlines have moderated capacity growth, banks aren’t adding branches and even successful retailers aren’t adding stores. And in my view, it’s easy to draw a line from lower investment to lower productivity growth. That leads me to the question, why has investment been low? My sense is that short-termism is increasing as CEO tenure decreases and corporate activism escalates. Share repurchases have become a compelling alternate use of capital. Cyclical industries have learned the lessons of over-capacity. And finally, some companies are still feeling hungover from the Great Recession. For example, I’ve spoken with business leaders who, even if they see opportunities for investment, are reluctant to take them. They continually see the next recession as “just around the corner.” As I said earlier, that’s a real issue today, as the economy’s numbers look strong but business sentiment has weakened considerably. Another factor in slowing productivity growth is declining start-up rates. Successful entrants drive innovation, which drives productivity. But the data show a massive reduction in entry rates, in all states and all sectors. Start-ups accounted for 12 percent of all firms in the late 1980s. That fell to 10.6 percent in the mid-2000s, and to 8 percent after 2008.4 As with investment, some of -8- this decline might be lingering risk aversion after the Great Recession. Some might be the impact of regulation. Research also points to the slow growth of the working age population as an explanation.5 In addition, I hear that there are tangible impediments—such as acquiring the necessary technology and talent—to building the scale and sophistication entrants require to be successful. What To Do? If the workforce grows just 0.6 percent per year, and productivity growth continues at about 1.3 percent annually, “trend” core growth is only in the 1.9 percent range— far slower than today. That’s the driver of the lower estimates you see. So what can be done to change that trend? The first step is to look at policies that could help draw more people back to the labor force, such as policies to support women’s participation in the workforce. One of the biggest differences between the United States and other developed countries is the availability of paid leave and subsidized child care, both of which have been shown to increase women’s labor force participation.6 As I noted a few minutes ago, people with less education are less likely to be working. So another critical area is workforce development initiatives to help people improve their skills. This is particularly important in rural and inner-city communities. It starts with programs to help adult workers acquire in-demand skills. But workforce development needs to start much earlier, at the K-12 level or even in early childhood.7 In this way, students who want to attend college can receive the preparation they need to graduate, because far too many students do not. Roughly -9- 40 percent of students who enroll in a four-year college don’t graduate within six years, and many of those who leave without a degree are still left with significant debt. The workforce can grow if students who enter college can graduate, and young people have, and know about, viable alternatives to four-year colleges. In addition, legal immigration is a huge opportunity to grow our workforce and increase our country’s human capital and entrepreneurial energy. I empathize with concerns that immigration could be detrimental to the employment and wages of Americans. But the economic research shows that immigration creates consumers and boosts productivity and start-up rates.8 Our country’s competitive advantage is that the most talented people in the world want to live here. That’s why so many of our grandparents came and started businesses (in my family’s case, a shoe store and doughnut shop). Our country should embrace this advantage. Speaking of productivity, the United States needs to promote a healthy environment for business investment. Business investment has grown significantly in five of the last six quarters. But, as I said, uncertainty is currently a real issue for the businesspeople I’ve spoken with throughout our District. This is particularly true when it comes to trade, but it’s also an issue in sectors such as health care, where the regulatory environment is unclear. American businesses are practical and innovative. If the rules are clear and the political environment is stable, they will find a way to grow. -10- Conclusion In sum, the United States faces a slower growth trend that isn’t in any of our interests. Changing the slope is doable via initiatives to expand the workforce and boost productivity growth. It’s an opportunity this country can’t afford to pass up. Thank you, and I welcome your reactions and questions. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Martin Baily and Nicholas Montalbano, “Why is U.S. Productivity Growth So Slow?” Brookings Institution Hutchins Center Working Paper no. 22, September 2016. 3 German Gutierrez and Thomas Philipon, “Investmentless Growth: An Empirical Investigation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017. 4 Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “ The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 3–24. 5 Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,” Manuscript, May 2018. 6 Janet Yellen, “So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy ,” Speech at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, May 5, 2017. 7 For example, see Kartik B. Athreya, Urvi Neelakantan, and Jessie Romero, “ Expanding the Scope of Workforce Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 14-05, May 2014. 8 For example, see Giovanni Peri, “Immigration, Productivity, and Labor Markets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2016, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 3-30; and Kauffman Foundation, “Research on Immigration and Entrepreneurship,” October 2016.

-1- Moving the Needle in Rural Communities Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Virginia Governor’s Conference on Agricultural Trade March 5, 2019 Richmond, Virginia Thank you for inviting me to join you today. It’s an honor to be here, and I appreciate the opportunity to discuss such an important sector of our state’s economy. I came to Richmond a little more than a year ago, after a 30-year career at McKinsey where in addition to consulting I held many line roles, including leading our Southern offices and serving as CFO. I’ve enjoyed the opportunity to dig into economics, policy and the Fed’s Fifth District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas. In my talk today, I could say a lot about the $91 billion agriculture and forestry contributes to Virginia’s economy; about the fact that exports account for about 10 percent of these industries;1 or about how little economists generally like restricting trade.2 But you’re experts, as are the speakers lined up for today. Instead, I would like to talk about the communities that depend on trade. There are about 150 counties in the United States that depend on exports for more than one-quarter of their GDP. Nearly all of them have fewer than 100,000 residents—and about half have fewer than 25,000 residents.3 (To put that in perspective, Chesterfield County has almost 350,000 residents.) As I’ve traveled around our District, I’ve seen small towns that represent the best of what our -2- country has to offer. But I’ve also seen many communities that have lost ground relative to bigger cities. They deserve our attention, especially to the extent trade issues affect them further. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. How Are Smaller Markets Different? Smaller towns are different from bigger cities. Part is demographic: Small-town populations tend to be older and have less formal education. Part is geographic: Smaller towns often are more remote and don’t have the population density to support large institutions. In addition, small towns have what we call “thinner” markets, ones with fewer employers. So if dislocation hits even one sizable employer, the whole town feels it. These differences lead to different labor market outcomes. Across the United States, the employment/population ratio for people between 16 and 64 is about 10 percentage points higher in urban areas than in smaller towns. In the Fifth District, the gap is almost 11 percentage points.4 The Fed’s mandate includes maximum employment, so we care about gaps in labor market outcomes. The solutions will vary from place to place. A coal-mining town in West Virginia doesn’t necessarily face the same challenges as a community on the Eastern Shore of Maryland or a farm town in central Virginia. But broadly speaking, research suggests four core themes to move the needle in these communities: education, connection, de-isolation and participation. -3- Theme 1: Education Let’s start with the first and arguably the most important -- education or, more broadly, preparing people to enter the workforce. On average, people with bachelor’s degrees earn more money, are more likely to be employed and even have better health outcomes. But rural residents are less likely to have a bachelor’s degree. In the United States, 35 percent of urban residents between the ages of 25 and 64 have a four-year degree, compared with 22 percent of people in smaller towns. The gap is even bigger in the Fifth District: 17 percentage points. All else equal, the Richmond Fed has estimated that if educational attainment in rural areas equaled that of urban areas, the employment/population gap in the District would shrink by 40 percent. But the answer isn’t just to send more kids to college, because a large share of students who enroll don’t graduate. We also have to focus on preparing people for college, and an important place to start is early childhood education. That’s because there’s a tremendous amount of evidence that “skills beget skills.” Early childhood education lays the foundation for later learning, both cognitive and noncognitive (or “soft”) skills. Many studies have found that children who attend a high-quality preschool are likely to have higher test scores, higher educational attainment, higher adult earnings and lower rates of incarceration and teen pregnancy.5 One study suggests attending pre-K boosts high school graduation rates by 11 percentage points.6 -4- The availability of early childhood education also matters for parents. Greater access to high- quality child care, including full-day preschool, has been shown to increase women’s labor force participation.7 Yet nearly 60 percent of rural communities are so-called “child care deserts,” with few or no options for licensed child care.8 That contributes to a gap in early childhood enrollment between bigger cities and smaller towns. In the Fifth District, 20 percent fewer small- town 3- and 4-year-olds are enrolled in pre-K. There are school districts in our region where fewer than 30 percent of third-graders can read at grade level and barely 60 percent of students graduate from high school—imagine the possibilities if we could increase these communities’ access to high-quality early childhood education. Of course, there are serious obstacles to scaling up pre-K, particularly in small towns where children and families are more dispersed and it might be harder to recruit teachers. But it’s not impossible. Oklahoma and Georgia, for example, have offered nearly universal pre-K for roughly two decades, raising preschool enrollment in rural areas 24 percent.9 West Virginia has been working to expand its program since the early 2000s, and pre-K is now offered in all of the state’s 55 counties. I’m also interested in the results of programs like KidsReadyNC,10 which is providing four rural counties in the state with assistance in program design and data monitoring to achieve a measure of success on one of the pathways the state has established. The Richmond Fed has supported this program by providing the staffing and technical assistance for the community asset mapping and financing sessions. Let me stress, however, that while the return on investment for preschool is quite large, it’s not a silver bullet. Early childhood education is a vital first step. The academic gains of pre-K can fade -5- if children subsequently attend lower-quality schools, so we must continue to invest in improving K-12 education. Theme 2: Connection Next, I’d like to talk about connection: facilitating workers’ access to good jobs. I’ve talked about the benefits of obtaining a bachelor’s degree. But attending a four-year college isn’t necessarily the right path for everyone, and there are well-paying jobs that don’t require a four- year degree. Career and technical education in high school and community colleges also are important pieces of the puzzle. They’re relatively low-cost ways for students to focus their efforts, learn about themselves and get additional preparation.11 We’re seeing more and more productive collaborations between schools and employers to provide small-town residents with in-demand skills. For example, there is a looming shortage of power line workers as many current workers near retirement age. So in 2015, Virginia’s electric cooperatives partnered with Southside Virginia Community College to develop a training program that provides students with hands-on experience and sought-after credentials. Also in Virginia, Patrick Henry Community College is partnering with the Harvest Foundation and local employers to train students in three fast-growing local sectors—health care, welding and advanced manufacturing. And I was recently in Greenville, North Carolina, where Pitt Community College is developing training programs specific to the needs of the many pharmaceutical companies locating in the area. These partnerships are good for employers, who need skilled workers, and they’re good for the students, who get a direct entrée to a quality job. The school plays a critical connector role. -6- The keys to scaling these programs are funding and one-to-one student intervention. Programs like these aren’t cheap, and many community colleges, particularly in small towns, are struggling with declining enrollment and slowing revenue growth. Southside Virginia, Patrick Henry and Pitt are benefiting from private-sector foundation grants, state grants and industry investment. But, increasingly, businesses are finding that these investments pay off. Many community college students also face obstacles to completion such as inadequate academic preparation or the need for child care or transportation. Successful initiatives help students address these challenges. That’s the goal of programs like Tennessee Promise and Tennessee Reconnect, which provide students with mentors and “navigators” to help them stay on track. Here in Virginia, the Rural Virginia Horseshoe Initiative places community college employees in high schools to serve as “career coaches” for students. And a growing number of community colleges participate in SingleStop, a program that consolidates access to social services. After SingleStop expanded to North Carolina in 2015, researchers found that students who participated attempted and earned more credits than students who didn’t.12 Theme 3: De-Isolation Third, let me discuss isolation. While it’s almost definitional, any effort to help those outside our largest cities needs to address a core challenge: social and geographic remoteness. With respect to social remoteness, I don’t mean to imply that there aren’t strong social networks in place. On the contrary. Rural residents often report feeling stronger ties to their community -7- and their neighbors than people in other areas. That’s why it’s not helpful for a policymaker like me to say, “Everyone should just move to the big cities where the jobs are.” Instead, we have to talk about improving the opportunities in these small towns. That requires addressing the informational and institutional gaps that often exist. For example, family, friends, neighbors and coworkers play a fundamental role in people’s aspirations and decisions about education and work.13 So if you live in an area where fewer adults have attended college, you might be less likely to view college as an option for yourself. Or, if you live in a more remote area, college reps might not come visit your high school. This is borne out by the data. Even controlling for academic preparation and income, some research has found that rural students are less likely to apply to high-resource colleges.14 The disappearance of anchor institutions such as banks, hospitals and colleges is part of the challenge. The number of rural “banking deserts” (counties with fewer than two bank branches per 10,000 residents) in the Fifth District roughly doubled between 2012 and 2017, from 18 to 37. Twelve rural hospitals in our District have closed since 2010. Another 21 hospitals—nearly 20 percent of those in our District—are at high financial risk of closing. Many rural colleges also face serious financial struggles. Ten in our District have closed their doors since 2000.15 The loss of these institutions creates direct costs in terms of residents’ access to financial services, health care and education. But there are also large indirect costs. Anchor institutions provide civic leaders and high-skilled workers who can raise the aspirations of those around them. They invest in their communities and educate residents about health, careers or finances. They supply -8- amenities that attract talent. They create incentives for other businesses and signal a community’s vibrancy. I’m intrigued by initiatives that work to “thicken” these “thin” markets. Some states work to place state and federal government institutions (such as state agencies or military bases) into smaller towns, and greater investments in rural hospitals might be a benefit of Virginia’s recent Medicaid expansion. Some colleges have successfully revamped their focus. Emory and Henry College, in Southwest Virginia, recently launched new professional training programs in occupational and physical therapy—which will also help to meet the community’s growing need for medical care. In addition, many people are interested in the effects of increasing broadband access. In my view, the effects are likely to be greatest when that access facilitates workforce development. In 2006, for example, Wilson, North Carolina, a small city about 50 miles east of Raleigh, decided to build its own broadband network. Since then, “Project Greenlight” has connected the city’s business development center to new firms, created new distance-learning programs in the city’s schools and even helped train firefighters. I’m also interested in investments to bring the community to struggling families, in ways that broaden their perspectives and improve their fortunes. While I was in Greenville, for example, I learned about the Conetoe Family Life Center, which provides children and families with access to education and health services, supported by a community garden and beekeeping program. They work to break down isolation. Theme 4: Participation -9- Finally, I want to discuss two impediments to labor force participation: disability and addiction. In the Fifth District’s smaller towns, 6.7 percent of the residents between the ages of 16 and 64 receive disability insurance, compared with 3.8 percent of residents in larger cities. This insurance is a vital safety net for many of our citizens, but there is also some evidence that the state of the overall economy influences disability rolls. I’m hopeful the gap will narrow if job prospects improve, and in fact there’s some evidence this is happening in the United States more broadly as the labor market tightens. Opioid addiction is a tragedy that knows no geographic or social boundaries, but it may be more concentrated in rural areas. In the Fifth District, average opioid prescription rates are almost 30 percent higher in smaller towns versus bigger cities, and overdose death rates are higher as well. With respect to the effects on the labor market, it’s very hard to disentangle cause and effect, but some preliminary research suggests that the increase in opioid prescription rates between 1999 and 2015 could account for 43 percent of the decline in prime-age men’s labor force participation.16 There’s no easy solution, but there are promising addiction-to-work programs, such as CARITAS Works in Virginia, which could help mitigate the effects of addiction. Conclusion The Richmond Fed has a real opportunity—and responsibility—to improve our understanding of the challenges people face and to search for opportunities to help them meet those challenges. We, along with our colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System, can bring our research to bear to help make a difference. We are also actively working to make a difference through a variety of community development initiatives17 and programs such as Invest in What’s Next, -10- which helps high school students weigh the costs and benefits of various postsecondary options and choose the path that’s best for them. I’ve encountered arguments that the challenges of distressed rural communities are too difficult to solve. They’re not. I’m old enough to remember when there was a similar pessimism about our major cities, which appeared during the 1970s and 1980s to be doomed to perpetual decline. They weren’t. From my perspective, the first step in thinking about the problems of these areas is to approach them as solvable—by good policymaking, by markets, by local leaders and by rural residents themselves.18 Thank you, and I look forward to your reactions and questions. 1 Terance J. Rephann, “The Economic Impact of Virginia’s Agriculture and Forest Industries,” Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service, May 2017. 2 Thomas I. Barkin, “Trade and Trepidation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, Second Quarter 2018. 3 Drew Desilver, “The Most Export-Dependent places in the U.S. Are Small Counties,” Pew Research Center, October 20, 2017. 4 For this analysis, urban areas are defined as counties in a metro areas with 1 million or more residents (USDA Rural Urban Continuum Code 1) or any county in a metro area with 250,000 to 1 million residents (RUCC 2). Rural/smaller towns are those in RUCC categories 3-9. 5 Visit https://heckmanequation.org/ for an overview of research on early childhood education. 6 Dana Charles McCoy et al., “Impacts of Early Childhood Education on Medium- and Long-Term Educational Outcomes,” Educational Researcher, November 2017, vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 474-487. 7 See Table 1 in Rasheed Malik, “The Effects of Universal Preschool in Washington, D.C.,” Center for American Progress, September 26, 2018. 8 The Center for American Progress defines a child care desert as a ZIP code with at least 30 children younger than 5 and either no child care centers or more than three times as many children as available spaces. 9 Maria Donovan Fitzpatrick, “Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects of Universal Prekindergarten,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 2010, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 51-85. 10 KidsReadyNC is a partnership between North Carolina State University’s Institute for Emerging Issues, the Belk Foundation, the Duke Endowment, the Frank Porter Graham Child Development Institute at UNC -Chapel Hill and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Community Development. 11 Nicholas Trachter, “Stepping Stone and Option Value in a Model of Postsecondary Education ,” Quantitative Economics, March 2015, vol. 6, pp. 223-256. 12 Lindsay Daugherty and Tiffany Tsai, “A One-Stop Approach to Supporting the Nonacademic Needs of Community College Students,” RAND Corporation Research Report, 2018. -11- 13 Santiago M. Pinto, “Social Interactions and the Effectiveness of Urban Policies,” Review of Regional Studies, June 2016, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. pp. 117-126. 14 Emily E. Cook, Jessie Romero, and Sarah Turner, “Transitioning from High School to College: Differences across Virginia,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 17-12 December 2017. 15 Helen Fessenden, “Too Small to Succeed?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, First Quarter 2017. 16 Alan B. Krueger, “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017. 17 To learn more, visit https://www.richmondfed.org/community_development. 18 Thomas I. Barkin, “The Supply Side of Rural Economic Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, Third Quarter 2018.
